The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Noble and Gentle Men of England
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Noble and Gentle Men of England

Author: Evelyn Philip Shirley

Release date: October 30, 2018 [eBook #58212]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by R.G.P.M. van Giesen.   For "Slankie".


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NOBLE AND GENTLE MEN OF ENGLAND ***




Produced by R.G.P.M. van Giesen.   For "Slankie".




  THE
  NOBLE AND GENTLE
  MEN OF ENGLAND.




  THE
  NOBLE AND GENTLE
  MEN OF ENGLAND;
  OR, NOTES TOUCHING
  THE ARMS AND DESCENTS
  OF THE
  ANCIENT KNIGHTLY AND GENTLE HOUSES OF ENGLAND,
  ARRANGED IN THEIR RESPECTIVE COUNTIES.
  ATTEMPTED BY
  EVELYN PHILIP SHIRLEY, ESQ. M.A. F.S.A.
  LATE ONE OF THE KNIGHTS OF THE SHIRE FOR THE COUNTY OF WARWICK.


[Illustration]

  WESTMINSTER:
  JOHN BOWER NICHOLS AND SONS.
  Third Edition, Corrected 1866.




PREFACE.


"That noble families are continued in a long succession of wealth,
honour, and reputation, is justly esteemed as one of the most
valuable of worldly blessings, as being the certain tokens of God
Almighty's providential favour, and the prudent conduct of such
ancestors,"--Nath. Johnston's _Account of the Family of Bruce Earl
of Aylesbury_, 1691, Harl. MS, 3879.

THE following imperfect attempt to bring together a few notes
relating to the ancient aristocracy of England, is confined in the
first place to the families _now existing_, and regularly
established either as _knightly_ or _gentle_ houses before the
commencement of the sixteenth century; secondly, no notice is taken
of those families who may have assumed the name and arms of their
ancestors in the _female line_: for the truth is, as it has been
well observed,* "that, unless we take the _male line_ as the general
standard of genealogical rank, we shall find ourselves in a hopeless
state of confusion;" thirdly, illegitimate descent is of course
excluded; and, fourthly, where families have sold their original
estates, they will be noticed in those counties where they are at
present seated; if however they still possess the ancient estate of
their family, though they may _reside_ in another county, they will
be mentioned for the most part under that county from whence they
originally sprung.

In those cases where the whole landed estate of the family has been
dissipated, although the male line still remains, all notice is
omitted, such families having no longer any claim to be classed in
any county. For, "ancient dignity was territorial rather than
personal, the whole system was rooted in the land, and, even in the
present day, though the land may have changed hands often, it has
carried along with it some of that sentiment of regard attached to
the lordship of it, as surely as its earth has the fresh smell which
it gives when upturned by the husbandman."**

This list also, it must be remembered, does not profess to give an
account of all those families whose descent may possibly be traced
beyond the year 1500, but merely of those who were in the position
of what we now call _county families_ before that period. The line
of demarcation indeed between the families who rose upon the ruins
of the monastic system, and the more ancient aristocracy of England,
is often very difficult to be traced, depending as it does on
documentary evidence often inaccessible, and obscured by the
fanciful and too favourable deductions of the heralds of the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.

With regard to the sources from whence the following memoranda have
been taken, I have endeavoured as much as possible to rely upon the
best county histories and MS. collections of authority, and
carefully to eschew those modern accounts of family history, which,
by ascribing the most absurd pretensions of ancient lineage to
families who bore no _real_ claim to that distinction, have done
much to bring genealogy itself into contempt among that numerous
class of readers who are but slightly acquainted with the subject.

I cannot conclude without recording my obligations to several
gentlemen who have in the most liberal manner placed their
genealogical collections at my service, and by so doing rendered
less imperfect these notices of the noble and gentle houses of
England: among that number I wish particularly to mention the names
of the late Mr. Joseph Morris of Shrewsbury and Mr. Joseph Hunter,
one of the Assistant Keepers of the Records, the learned and
accurate historian of South Yorkshire.
                                               E.P.S.

  Lower Eatington, July 1, 1860.

  * Quarterly Review, Jan. 1858, p. 37.
  ** Quarterly Review, Jan. 1858, p. 31.




PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.

ANOTHER edition of this little work having been called for, I have
carefully revised and corrected what has been already written; I
have also made some additions, the result of further investigation,
and the information of many friends and correspondents, whose
courtesy and kindness I here beg most gratefully to acknowledge.

Since the book was published in the year 1859, the male lines of
three families, whose names were originally comprehended in it, have
become extinct, viz.: Cotton of Landwade, in the county of
Cambridge, Hornyold of Blackmore Park, and Hanford of Wollashill,
both in Worcestershire. On the other hand, notices of eight "_new
peers?_" will be found in the present volume, four of which also
occurred in the second edition. I allude to Lovett of Liscombe, in
the county of Buckingham, and Basset of Tehidy, in the county of
Cornwall--very ancient families, whose landed property being until
lately in female hands, could not, in accordance with the rules
which I had laid down, be comprehended in the first edition; I have
also added Huyshe of Sand, in Devonshire, Patten of Bank Hall,
in Lincolnshire, Bertie of Uffington, Anderson of Brocklesby, and
Massingberd of Wrangle, all in Lincolnshire, and, lastly, Upton of
Ashton Court, in the county of Somerset. And here I must again beg
to remind the reader, that the intention of this work is not to give
an account of every family whose pedigree may be continued in the
male line beyond the time which I have mentioned (the beginning of
the sixteenth century), but of those only who were established as
_county families_, "inheriting arms from their ancestors," at that
period. It is no doubt in many cases very difficult to distinguish
accurately the pretensions of many families who may possibly have a
fair claim to this distinction, though, from the reasons to which I
have formerly alluded, it is not easy to establish them. I can only
say that as far as my information extends I have endeavoured fairly
and honestly to draw the correct line, but whether I have succeeded
must be left to the judgment of others.
                                              E. P. S.

  Lower Eatington, January 22, 1866.




"An ancient estate should always go to males. It is mighty foolish
to let a stranger have it because he marries your daughter and takes
your name. As for an Estate newly acquired by trade, you may give
it, if you will, to the dog _Towser_, and let him keep his _own_
name."--DR. JOHNSON.




+Noble and Gentle Men of England+


BEDFORDSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


ST.JOHN OF MELCHBOURNE, LORD ST.JOHN OF BLETSHOE 1558-9.


[Illustration] THIS great and ancient Family, though not connected
with this county before the reign of Henry VIII., yet, having been
for a considerable time seated at Melchbourne, may with propriety be
included among the Bedfordshire families, and indeed stands alone as
the only one of knightly rank.* Descended in the direct male line
from Hugh de Port mentioned in Domesday, in the twelfth century
William son of Adam de Port took the name of St.John from the
heiress of that great Norman family. Basing in Hampshire, Stanton
St.John in Oxfordshire, Bletshoe in the county of Northampton,
and Lydiard Tregoze in Wiltshire, both derived from the heiress of
Beauchamp in the reign of Henry VI.--have successively been seats of
the St.Johns, who have made themselves sufficiently remarkable both
for their loyalty and disloyalty in the reign of Charles I., not to
mention the ambition and ill-directed abilities of the great Lord
Bolingbroke in that of Anne.

_Younger Branch_. St.John of Lydiard Tregoze, Viscount Bolingbroke
1712. Baronet 1611. Descended from Oliver, second son of Sir Oliver
St.John and the heiress of Beauchamp.

See Leland's Itinerary, edition 1769, vol. vi. folio 27, p. 26.
Brydges's Collins, vi. 42 and 741. For an account of Bletshoe, and
the monuments there, see Gent. Mag. 1799, p. 745. For Lydiard
Tregoze, and other monuments of the St.Johns, whose pedigree, by Sir
R. St.George, is painted on folding-doors on the north side of the
chancel, see the Topographer, i. 508.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a chief gules two mullets pierced or_. William de
St.John in the thirteenth century bore in his arms the addition of a
bend gules, which was continued by his descendants till the reign of
Elizabeth. (Gent. Mag. 1787, 681.) The present coat was borne by Sir
John de St.John in the reign of Edward II.; at the same time other
members of the family varied the field and charges thus: Sir Roger
bore, _Ermine, on a chief gules two mullets or_; Sir Eymis, _Argent,
crusilly sable, on a chief gules two mullets or_; Sir John de
Layneham, _Argent, on a chief gules two mullets or, a border
indented sable_. John, heir of John de St.John, differenced his arms
with a label azure, according to the roll of Carlaverock. The roll
of arms of the reign of Richard II. gives the _mullets of six points
pierced azure_. Edward St.John at this period bore, _Argent, on a
chief dancetté gules two mullets of six points or, pierced vert_.
Rolls of the dates.

Present Representative, St.Andrew Beauchamp St.John, 14th Baron
St.John.

  * "Hungry Time hath made a glutton's meal on this Catalogue of
    Gentry (the List of Gentry of the reign of Henry VI,) and hath
    left but a very little morsel for manners remaining." Fuller,
    Worthies of Bedfordshire.




+Gentle.+


POLHILL OF HOWBURY, IN THE PARISH OF RENHOLD.


[Illustration] This family is of ancient Kentish extraction, and is
a branch of the Polhills or Polleys of Preston, in Shoreham, in that
county, descended from John Polhill, eldest son of John Polhill and
Alice de Buckland, the heiress of Preston, in the reign of Henry VI.
The Rev. Richard Polwhele, the Historian of Cornwall, was of opinion
that the Polhills of Kent were a branch of the Cornish Polwheles,
which emigrated from the western into the eastern counties at a very
early period; they were certainly seated at Detling in
Hollingbourne, in Kent, at or previous to the reign of Edward III.
In the time of Elizabeth, the Polhills were of Frenches, in the
parish of Burwash, in Sussex. The immediate ancestor of the present
family was Nathaniel Polhill, of Burwash and Howbury, an eminent
merchant, who died in 1782.

See a very minute account of all the branches of this ancient family
in the Topographer and Genealogist, i. pp. 180 and 577. See also
Hasted's History of Kent, vol. i, p. 365, and vol. iii. p. 4.

ARMS.--_Or, on a bend gules three cross-crosslets of the first_. It
appears by the Roll of Arms of the reign of Richard II., that Monsr.
Rauff Poley bore a coat nearly similar, viz, _Argent, on a bend
gules three crosses patée or_.

Present Representative, Frederick Polhill, Esq.




BERKSHIRE.


+Gentle.+


EYSTON OF EAST HENDRED.


[Illustration] It has been observed by old Fuller, "The Lands of
Berkshire are very skittish, and are apt to cast their owners;" and
again, "Of names which were in days of yore--few remain here of a
great store." The ancient family of Eyston, and the succeeding one
of Clarke, are indeed the only exceptions at the present day to this
rule. The Eystons have been seated at East Hendred since the reign
of Henry VI.; John Eiston, their ancestor, having at that period
married "Isabel, daughter and heir of John Stow, of Burford, co.
Oxford, whose wife was Maud, daughter and heir of Rawlin Arches, of
East Henreth, whose great-grandmother was Amy, daughter and heir of
Richard Turbervill, of East Henreth, Esq."

See the Visitation of Berks, 1566. Harl. MS. 1822, 26 b, and Harl.
1532, 19 b. See also Lysons's Berkshire, pp. 186, 292, and Clarke's
Hundred of Wanting, 4to. 1824, p. 130.

ARMS.--(Confirmed in 1566.) _Sable, three lions rampant or_.

Present Representative, Charles John Eyston, Esq.




CLARKE OF ARDINGTON.

[Illustration] The pedigree begins with John Clarke, of Basledon, in
this county, living there the latter part of the fifteenth century.
The family afterwards removed to Ardington, where they were
established, according to Lysons, in the reign of Henry VII. The
Visitations of 1566 and 1623 record five generations of the Clarkes
before the year 1600.

See the Visitation of Berks, 1566. Harl. MS. 5822, 22 b, and Harl.
1532. See also Lysons's Berkshire, pp. 180, 186, and Clarke's
Hundred of Wanting, p. 56.

ARMS.--(Confirmed Oct. 22, 1600.) _Argent, on a fess sable three
plates between three crosses patée of the second_. Sometimes the
fess is placed between six crosses patée.

Present Representative, William Nelson Clarke, Esq.




BUCKINGHAMSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


CHETWODE OF CHETWODE, BARONET 1700.


[Illustration] This very ancient family is lineally descended from
Robert de Thain, who held Chetwode under the Bishop of Baieux in the
time of William the Conqueror, as appears by Domesday Book.

John de Chetwode having during the reign of Edward III. married the
heiress of Oakeley, of Oakeley in Staffordshire, the family have
mostly resided there, as well as at Ansley Hall in Warwickshire,
derived from the heiress of Ludford in 1821.

Willis, writing in 1755, says--"This manor of Chetwode, as appears
to me, has been in the possession and inheritance of the Chetwodes
longer than any estate or manor in this county of Buckingham has
continued the property of any other family now there existing."

See Willis's Buckingham, p. 172; Erdeswicke's Staffordshire, ed.
1844, p. 119; Wotton's Baronetage, iv. p. 82; and Lysons's
Buckinghamshire, p. 172.

ARMS.--_Quarterly argent and gules, four crosses patée
counterchanged_.

Present Representative, Sir John Newdigate-Ludford-Chetwode, 5th
Baronet.




DAYRELL OF LILLINGSTONE DAYRELL.


[Illustration] A very ancient and honourable family of Norman
descent, who came over with the Conqueror, and seated themselves at
Lillingstone before the year 1200, Richard son of Elias Dayrell
being seised of a message and half a knight's fee there in King
Richard the First's time, or the beginning of King John's reign.
Before 1306 the Dayrell became possessed of the fee of the manor,
which has ever since continued in the family.

The Dayrell of Shudy Camps, in the county of Cambridge, are a
younger branch of this family, sprung from Francis, second son of
Paul Dayrell of Lillingstone, sheriff of Buckinghamshire 1579.*

See Willis's Buckingham, p. 213; Lysons, p. 595.

ARMS.--_Azure, a lion rampant or, crowned argent_.

Present Representative, Edmund Francis Dayrell, Esq.

  * The Darells of Calehill, in Kent, purchased in the 4th Henry
    IV., and sprung from the Darells of Sesay, in Yorkshire, are
    _supposed_ to be a younger branch of this venerable family. The
    extinct family of Darell of Littlecote, Wiltshire, for which see
    the Topographer, ii. 101, and the Darells of Richmond, Baronet,
    1795, are sprung from the house of Calehill.




GRENVILLE OF WOTTON UNDER BARNWOOD, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM 1822,
MARQUESS OF BUCKINGHAM 1782, EARL TEMPLE 1749, VISCOUNT AND BARON
COBHAM 1718.


[Illustration] There is good reason to believe that this family,
seated at Wotton from the reign of Henry I., is a collateral branch
of the Grenvilles of the West. The manor of Wotton, among many
others, was given by William I. to Walter Giffard, Earl of
Buckingham. Isabel, daughter and coheir of Walter the second Earl,
is said to have brought it in marriage, about the year 1097, to
Richard de Grenville.

The consequence of this family in modern times is owing to matches
with the heiresses of the great houses of Temple, Nugent, and
Chandos.

See Brydges's Collins's Peerage, ii. p. 390, and Lysons, p. 673. See
also Moule's Bibliotheca Herald, p. 563, for an account of the MS.,
formerly at Stowe, viz. The original Evidences of the Grenville
Family, collected by Richard Grenville, of Wotton, Esq. during the
civil wars of the seventeenth century.

ARMS.--_Vert, on a cross argent five torteauxes_.

Present Representative, Richard Plantagenet Campbell
Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville, 3rd Duke of
Buckingham.




HARCOURT OF ANKERWYCKE.


[Illustration] On the decease of the last Earl Harcourt, in 1830,
the representation in the male line of the illustrious House of
Harcourt devolved on this family, descended from a younger brother
of Simon, first Viscount Harcourt, and the heiress of Lee. Stanton
Harcourt, in the county of Oxford, was possessed by the ancestors of
this great House in 1166, and continued in the family till the
extinction of the elder line in 1830. The pedigree is traced to
Robert de Harcourt, who married Joan, daughter of Robert Beaumont,
Earl of Mellent, and who was grandson of Robert who attended William
the Conqueror in his expedition to England in 1066.

See Brydges's Collins's Peerage, iv. p. 428; and Nichols's
Leicestershire, iv. pt. 2. p. 519.*

ARMS.--_Gules, two bars or_. This coat was borne by Sir John de
Harcourt in the reign of Edward II. Thomas Harecourt, the reverse,
in the reign of Richard II. Rolls of the period.

Present Representative, George Simon Harcourt, Esq.




+Gentle.+


LOVETT OF LISCOMBE.


[Illustration] Vitalis Lovett of Rushton, in the county of
Northampton, who lived in the reign of Henry II., appears to be the
first proved ancestor of this venerable family, said to be of Norman
origin. William Lovett of Rushton, the son of Vitalis, held certain
lands in Henwick, also in Northamptonshire, of Richard Engaine and
his heirs by the service of finding two horsemen to follow the said
Richard to hunt the wolf in any part of England. This service was
remitted to John Lovet, son or grandson of William, in the reign of
Edward I., and in lieu thereof an annual rent-charge of ten
shillings was imposed. Soon after this period, viz: in 1304, (33
Edw. I.) Liscombe in the parish of Soulbury came into the family,
being in the possession of Robert Lovett and Sarah his wife,
daughter and heir of Sir Roger Turvile, from the second marriage of
their son Thomas, descended the Lovetts of Astwell in
Northamptonshire, since the reign of Elizabeth represented in the
female line by the Shirleys Earls Ferrers. Liscombe has from the
beginning of the fourteenth century remained the inheritance of the
elder branch of the Lovetts, though the direct descent has been
often interrupted. In 1781, Jonathan Lovett, the representative of
the family, was created a baronet by King George III. His Majesty's
remark on this occasion is preserved in Betham's Baronetage. "In the
summer of 1781, the Earl of Chesterfield having been some time
absent from court, was asked by the King where he had been so
long? 'On a visit to Mr. Lovett of Buckinghamshire,' said the
Earl. 'Ah,' said the King, 'is that Lovett of Liscombe? They are of
the genuine old Norman breed, how happens it that they are not
baronets? would they accept the title? Go tell him,' continued the
King, 'is that the title is much at his service; they have ever
stuck to the Crown at a pinch.'" The same work also gives a very
curious, and to an antiquary very tantalizing, account of the
ancient armour and documents once preserved at Liscombe, and
describes their melancholy fate. Sir Jonathan Lovett having died
without surviving male issue in 1812, the title of Baronet became
extinct and the property descended to his daughters; on the decease
of the survivor, Miss Eliza Lovett, in 1861, the ancient seat of
this venerable family reverted by her will to the next male heir,
the present representative of the family, descended from a younger
brother of Sir Jonathan Lovett, baronet.

See Baker's Northamptonshire, i. p. 732; Lipscombe's
Buckinghamshire, iii. p. 457; Stemmata Shirleiana, pr. pr., 1841, p.
58; Collectanea Topog. et Genealog. vi. p. 300, and Betham's
Baronetage.

ARMS.--Evidently allusive to the name, and to the service of hunting
the wolf, _Argent, three wolves passant in pale sable, armed and
langued gules_.

Present Representative, Jonathan Vaughan Lovett, Esq.




CAMBRIDGESHIRE.


+Gentle.+


BENDYSHE OF BARRINGTON.


[Illustration] The name is local, from Bendish, in the parish of
Radwinter, in Essex, where Peter Westley was seated at a very early
period. His grandson was called Ralf of Westley, alias Bendishe, and
from him this ancient family, one branch of which was long settled
at Steeple Bumstead, in Essex, is descended. A manor in Barrington
came from the heiress of Bradfield early in the fifteenth century,
and had acquired the name of "The Manor of Bendyshe" so far back as
the year 1493; it has ever since remained the inheritance of this
the eldest line of the Bendyshe family, of whom a younger branch was
of Topfield Hall, in Hadley, co. Suffolk, whose heiress married
Doyley of Overbury, also of Steeple Bumstead before mentioned,
created Baronet in 1611, extinct in 1717; and other branches again
were of Hadley and Turvey in Bedfordshire.

See Lysons's Cambridgeshire, p. 86, and the Visitation of Essex
1612, Harl. MS. 6095, fol. 16, where is a good pedigree of Bendyshe,
brought down to William Bendyshe, Esq. tenth in descent from Peter
Westley.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron sable between three ram's heads erased
azure_.

Present Representative, John Bendyshe, Esq.




CHESHIRE.


+Knightly.+


DAVENPORT OF WOODFORD.


[Illustration] The Davenports claim precedence among the knightly
families of Cheshire,--that "seed-plot of gentry," "the mother and
the nurse of the gentility of England," and are traced directly to
the Conquest. The elder line, which Leland terms "the best and first
house of the Davenports at Devonport; a great old house covered with
leade on the Ripe of Daven, three miles above Congleton," became
extinct in 1674. The coheiresses married Davies and Davenport of
Woodford. Ormus de Daumporte, living in the time of William I., is
the first recorded ancestor of this family. To his son, Richard de
Dauneporte, Hugh Earl of Chester gave the chief foresterships of the
forests of Leek and Macclesfield about 1166, a feudal office still
held by this house.

The present family are sprung from Nicholas, third son of Sir John
or Jenkin Davenport, of Wheltrough and Henbury, who was himself a
younger son of Thomas, second son of Sir Thomas Davenport of
Davenport, the 13th of Edward II. Woodford was granted by John
Stafford and Isabella his wife, about the time of Edward III., to
John, third son of Thomas Davenport of Wheltrough, (an elder line
not traced beyond 1677,) while the Davenports of Henbury were
extinct before 1664. Davenport of Calveley, founded by Arthur, sixth
son of Sir John Davenport of Davenport, killed at Shrewsbury in
1403, became extinct in 1771. The coheiresses married Bromley
and Davenport of Woodford. Davenport of Bramhall, founded by the
second son of Thomas Davenport of Wheltrough and the heiress of
Bramhall, in the time of Edward III., survived till 1838. The
Davenports of Davenport House, in the parish of Worfield, in
Shropshire, are the only younger branch now remaining; they spring
from the Davenports of Chorley and the heiress of Bromley of Hallon
or Hawn, in the parish of Worfield. See Blakeway's Sheriffs of
Salop, pp. 85, 143, 228.

For Davenport of Davenport and Woodford, see Ormerod's Cheshire,
iii. 39, 346, 357; for those of Calveley, ib. ii. 153; Henbury, iii.
352; Bramhall, iii. 401; Chorley, iii. 312. See also Leland's Itin.,
vii. fol. 42, and Harl. MSS. 2119, for a good pedigree of the family
drawn from original evidences.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three cross-crosslets fitchée
sable_. The crest of this family, _a felon's head, souped proper,
haltered or_, alludes to the power of life and death within the
Forests of Leek and Macclesfield, granted by Hugh Earl of Chester.

Present Representative, Arthur Henry Davenport, Esq.




GROSVENOR OF EATON, MARQUESS OF WESTMINSTER 1831, EARL GROSVENOR
1784, BARON GROSVENOR 1761, BARONET 1662.


[Illustration] Descended from Gilbert le Grosvenor, nephew of Hugh
Lupus, Earl of Chester; the pedigree of this ancient family is,
thanks to the famous controversy with the Scropes, well ascertained.
The principal line of the Grosvenors was seated at Hulme, in this
county, in the hundred of Northwich, and was extinct in the
22nd year of Henry VI. The Grosvenors of Eaton descend from
Ralph second son of Sir Thomas Grosvenor of Hulme, who married Joan,
sole daughter and heir of John Eaton, of Eton or Eaton, Esq. early
in the fifteenth century. The match of Sir Thomas Grosvenor, Bart.
in 1676, with Mary, sole daughter and heir of Alexander Davies, of
Ebury, in the county of Middlesex, Esq. laid the foundation of the
great wealth and consequent honours of this family.

Younger branches: the Earl of Wilton 1801; the Baron Ebury 1857.

See Ormerod, ii. 454, and iii. 87; Brydges's Collins, v. 239; and
the Scrope and Grosvenor Roll _passim_.

ARMS.--_Azure, a garb or_, used since the sentence of the Court in
the cause of Sir Richard le Scrope and Sir Robert le Grosvenor in
1389, instead of _Azure, a bend or_, and allusive to his descent
from the ancient Earls of Chester.

Present Representative, Richard Grosvenor, 2nd Marquess of
Westminster, K.G.




EGERTON OF OULTON, BARONET 1617.


[Illustration] This is the principal male branch of the great House
of Egerton, formerly Earls and Dukes of Bridgewater and Earl of
Wilton. The pedigree begins with Philip Goch, second son of David de
Malpas, surnamed le Clerk, which David was lord of a moiety of the
Barony of Malpas. The present family is descended from Sir Philip
Egerton, third son of Sir Rowland Egerton, of Egerton and Oulton,
Baronet, who died in 1698. The Baronetcy devolved on Sir John
Egerton, uncle of the present Baronet, on the death of the Earl of
Wilton, and extinction of the elder line, in 1814. Oulton came from
the heiress of Hugh Done, anno 1498. It is thus mentioned in
Leland's Itinerary: "The auncientest of the Egertons dwellith now at
Oldeton, and Egerton buildith ther now." (Itin. vii. fol. 42.)
Younger branch, Egerton-Warburton, of Warburton and Arley, in this
county.

See Wotton's Baronetage, i. 271; Brydges's Collins, iii. 170, v.
528; Ormerod, ii. 118, 350; and for many curious particulars of the
Bridgewater Egertons, see the Topographer, ii. 136, &c.

ARMS.--_Argent, a lion rampant gules between three pheons sable_.
The pheons were the ancient arms of Malpas; the lion was added by
Uryan Egerton, about the middle of the fourteenth century; according
to tradition, an augmentation granted as a reward for his services
in the Scotch wars.

Present Representative, Sir Philip de Malpas Grey-Egerton, 10th
Baronet, M. P. for S. Cheshire.




CHOLMONDELEY OF CHOLMONDELEY, MARQUESS OF CHOLMONDELEY 1815, EARL OF
CHOLMONDELEY 1706, BARON 1689.


[Illustration] Descended with the Egertons from the Barons of
Malpas, and immediately from Robert de Cholmondelegh, second son of
William Belward, lord of a moiety of the Barony of Malpas, and
younger brother of David the ancestor of the Egertons; which Robert
was seated at Cholmondeley in the reign of King John.

Younger branches. Cholmeley of Whitby, in Yorkshire, Baronet
1641, extinct 1688; descended from Robert, younger son of Hugh
Cholmondeley, temp. Edw. III. See the Memoirs of Sir Hugh Cholmeley,
Knight and Baronet, a curious book privately printed in
1787.--Cholmeley of Brandsby, since the extinction of the Whitby
family the only representative of the Cholmondeleys of
Yorkshire.--Cholmeley of Easton, co. Lincoln, Baronet 1806,
descended from Sir Henry Cholmeley, of Burton Coggles, co. Lincoln,
who died in 1620.

Cholmondeley of Vale Royal in this county, Baron Delamere 1821,
descended from Thomas, younger son of Sir Hugh Cholmondeley of
Cholmondeley, who died in 1501.

See Ormerod, ii. 356, and for Cholmondeley of Vale Royal, ii. 78.
Brydges's Collins, iv. 16.

ARMS.--_Gules, two helmets in chief argent, garnished or, and in
base a garb of the third_.

Present Representative, George Horatio Cholmondeley, 2nd Marquess of
Cholmondeley.




TATTON, CALLED EGERTON OF TATTON, BARON EGERTON OF TATTON 1859.


[Illustration] Robert Tatton of Kenworthy, in Northenden, who
married the heiress of William de Withenshaw, alias Massey, about
the latter end of the reign of Edward III., is the first _proved_
ancestor of this family, but there is reason to believe that he was
descended from the much more ancient house of the name who were
seated at Tatton in the twelfth century. Withenshaw, now the seat of
the younger branch of this family, remained from the period above
mentioned the inheritance and residence of the Tattons, until
the decease of Samuel Egerton, Esq. in 1780, when the estate of
Tatton, which is supposed to have given name to the family, devolved
by his will on William Tatton of Withenshaw, Esq., who had married
Hester, sister of Mr. Egerton. Tatton had passed to the Egertons
through the families of Tatton, Massey, Stanley, and Brereton.

Younger branch, Tatton of Withenshaw, in this county. See Ormerod,
iii. 315, and Gentleman's Magazine 1798, 930.

ARMS.--_Quarterly argent and gules, four crescents counterchanged_.
The arms are perhaps founded on the coat of Massey.

Present Representative, William Tatton Egerton, Baron Egerton of
Tatton.




BUNBURY OF STANNEY, BARONET 1681.


[Illustration] A family of great antiquity, descended from Henry de
Boneberi, in the time of Stephen, a younger brother of the House of
St. Pierre in Normandy. William de Boneberi, son of Henry, was Lord
of Boneberi in the reign of Richard I. But the direct ancestor was
David brother of Henry, whose great-grandson Alexander de Bunbury
was living in the fifteenth of Henry III. Stanney, still the
inheritance, but not the residence, of the Bunburys, came from the
heiress of the same name in the seventeenth of Edward III.

See Ormerod, ii. 216, and Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 687.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend sable three chessrooks of the field_.

Present Representative, Sir Charles James Fox Bunbury, 8th
Baronet.




LEYCESTER OF TOFT.


[Illustration] Descended from Sir Nicholas Leycester, who acquired
the manor of Nether-Tabley in marriage, and died in 1295. The male
line of the eldest branch of this family, established at
Nether-Tabley, became extinct in 1742. The present and younger
branch springs from Ralph, younger brother of John Leycester of
Tabley, who married Joan, daughter and heir of Robert Toft of Toft:
she was a widow in 1390. The antiquary Sir Peter was of the Tabley
line.

Younger branch, Leycester of Whiteplace, co. Berks.

See Ormerod, i. 385, 456; iii. 190.

ARMS.--_Azure, a fess or, fretty gules, between two fleurs-de-lis of
the second_. Another coat was granted by Dethick to Sir Ralph
Leycester of Toft, the second year of Edward VI., viz. _Sable, on a
fess engrailed between three falcons volant argent, beaked and
membered or, a lion's head caboshed azure between two covered cups
gules_. But this very unnecessary and overloaded coat does not
appear to have been used.

Present Representative, Ralph Oswald Leycester, Esq.




MASSIE OF CODDINGTON.


[Illustration] The pedigree in Ormerod begins with Hugh Massie, who
married Agnes, daughter and heir of Nicholas Bold, of Coddington.
Their son William purchased the manor of Coddington in the
eighteenth of Henry VI. The parentage of Hugh Massie is a matter of
dispute, but he was probably a younger son of Sir John Massie of
Tatton, who died in the eighth of Henry. He is also by others
supposed to have been descended from the Massies of Podington, a
younger branch of the Barons of Dunham Massey. This family is
perhaps the only remnant in the direct male line of the posterity of
any of the Cheshire Barons. General Massie, a younger son of this
house, was a distinguished officer in the Civil Wars, both in the
service of the Commonwealth and in that of Charles II.

Younger branches: Massey of Pool-Hall, in this county, descended
from the second son of Massie of Coddington, who was born in 1604.
From Edward the third son descended the Massies of Rosthorne, also
in Cheshire, now extinct. For the extinct branches of Broxton and
Podington, see Ormerod, ii. 372 and 308; for Massie of Coddington,
ii. 399; for Massie of Pool-Hall, iii. 188.

ARMS.--_Quarterly gules and or, in the first and fourth three
fleurs-de-lis argent, a canton of the third_. There was a dispute
about the arms of Massey between the Houses of Tatton and Podington
(for which see "The Scrope and Grosvenor Roll," vol. ii. p. 262),
which was decided in 1378 by the arbitration of Sir Hugh Calveley
and others. The present coat, except that the first and second
quarters were or, and the canton omitted, was awarded to Massey of
Podington. Massey of Tatton bore the same arms with three escallops
argent in lieu of the fleurs-de-lis. The elder line of Dunham bore
_Quarterly or and gules, in the second quarter a lion passant
argent_.

Present Representative, Richard Massie, Esq.




WILBRAHAM OF DELAMERE.


[Illustration] This family represents the eldest branch of the
Wilbrahams of Cheshire, descended from Richard de Wilburgkam,
sheriff of this county in the forty-third year of Henry III. In the
third of Edward IV. the Wilbrahams were seated at Woodhay, in
Cheshire, by a match with the heiress of Golborne: this, the elder
line, created Baronet in 1620-1, was extinct in 1692. The
present family are descended from the second son of Thomas Wilbraham
of Woodhay, and were seated at Townsend in Nantwich in the reign of
Elizabeth; they removed to Delamere the latter part of the
eighteenth century.

Younger branches: Wilbraham Baron Skelmersdale 1828; and Wilbraham
of Rode, in this county, both descended from Randle, younger brother
of Roger Wilbraham, of Nantwich, who died in 1754. Wilbraham of
Dorfold, sold in 1754, but existing at Falmouth in 1818, was sprung
from the youngest son of Richard Wilbraham, of Nantwich, who died in
1612. See Ormerod, ii. 65; iii. 31, 184, 199.

ARMS.--_Argent, three bends wavy azure_. The Dorfold branch bore for
distinction _a canton gules_. Additional coat, granted by Flower,
temp. Eliz.; _Azure, two bars argent, on a canton of the first a
wolf's head erased of the second_.

Present Representative, George Fortescue Wilbraham, Esq.




LEGH OF EAST HALL, IN HIGH LEGH.


[Illustration] Efward de Lega, who appears from his name to have
been of Saxon origin, and who lived at or near the period of the
Conquest, was the patriarch of this ancient family, of which the
principal male line failed in the time of Edward IV. Thomas Legh, of
Northwood, in the same parish of High-Legh, the ancestor of the
present family, succeeded after a long litigation as the next heir
male in the reign of Henry VIII. See Ormerod, i. 358.

ARMS.--Allowed 1566. _Argent, a lion rampant gules, armed and
langued azure_.

Present Representative, George Cornwall Legh, Esq. M.P. for North
Cheshire.




LEIGH OF WEST HALL, IN HIGH LEGH.


[Illustration] Descended from Richard de Lymme, younger son of Hugh
de Lymme, which Richard in the latter part of the thirteenth century
married Agnes, daughter and sole heir of Richard de Legh,
great-grandson of Hamon de Legh, the first mentioned in the
pedigree. Richard de Lymme had issue Thomas de Legh, of West Hall,
living in 1305.

Younger branches: Leigh (called Trafford), of Oughtrington, in this
county, descended from John second son of Richard Leigh, of West
Hall, who died in 1486; for whom see Ormerod, i. 439.

Leigh of Leatherlake House in Surrey, descended from Thomas second
son of the Rev. Peter Leigh of West Hall, who died in 1719; and
Leigh of South Carolina, Baronet 1773, descended from Peter third
son of the same Rev. Peter Leigh. See Ormerod, i. 350.

ARMS.--_Allowed 1563. Or, a lion rampant gules, armed and langued
azure_. For four descents after the match with Agnes de Legh, her
descendants used the coat of Lymme, _Gules, a pale fusillé argent_,
conclusive evidence of the descent of this family from Richard de
Lymme, and not from William de Venables, another husband of Agnes de
Legh. Indeed, in the Visitation of 1566, this coat of Lymme was
allowed to Leigh of West Hall; but in 1584 both the East and West
Hall families claimed the lion rampant gules. In 1663 the arms were
settled as at present.

Present Representative, Egerton Leigh, Esq.




ALDERSEY OF ALDERSEY, IN THE PARISH OF CODDINGTON.


[Illustration] The pedigree is traced to Hugh de Aldersey, in the
reign of Henry III., soon after which time the family divided into
two branches; the estate and manor of Aldersey being also held in
separate moieties by the representatives of the two families: one
moiety eventually passed by an heir-general to Hatton of Hatton, and
has since been united into one estate, by purchase from Dutton of
Hatton. A younger branch of this family was seated at Chester, of
which was William Aldersey the antiquary, mayor of that city in
1614.

See Ormerod, ii. 404.

ARMS.--_Gules, on a bend engrailed argent, between two cinquefoils
or, three leopard's faces vert_. The more ancient coat, given in
King's Vale Royal, appears to have been, _Sable, three chargers or
dishes argent_.

Present Representative, Thomas Aldersey, Esq.




BASKERVYLE, (CALLED GLEGG,) OF OLD WITHINGTON.


[Illustration] Ormerod traces this family to Sir John Baskervyle,
grantee of a moiety of Old Withington from Robert de Camvyle in
1266, and that estate has ever since remained in the family. In 1758
John Baskervyle, Esq., the representative of the house of Old
Withington, having married the heiress of Glegg of Gayton, in this
county, assumed that name in lieu of his own.

See Ormerod, iii. 355; and for Glegg, ib. ii. 285.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron gules between three hurts_. This coat,
_the chevron charged with three fleurs-de-lis or_, was borne by
"Monsire de Baskervile;" see Sir Harris Nicolas's Roll of Arms temp.
E. III.

Present Representative, John Baskervyle Glegg, Esq.




BROOKE OF NORTON, BARONET 1662.


[Illustration] Adam Lord of Leighton, in the reign of Henry III., is
the first recorded ancestor of this family, who continued at
Leighton, the seat of the principal branch of the Brookes, until the
extinction of the elder male line, in or about the year 1632.
Richard Brooke, younger son of Thomas Brooke of Leighton, purchased
Norton from King Henry VIII. in the year 1545, which has remained
the residence of his heirs male.

Younger branches: Broke of Nacton in the county of Suffolk, Baronet
1813; descended from Sir Richard Brooke, Knight, Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, in the reign of Henry VIII., youngest son of Thomas
Brooke of Leighton, the ancestor of the Norton family. There was a
former baronetcy in this family, created 1661, extinct 1693. Brooke
of Mere in this county, sprung from Sir Peter Brooke, third son of
Thomas Brooke of Norton, established at Mere by purchase in 1632.

See Ormerod, i. 360, 500; and iii. 241; Collectanea Topographica et
Genealogica, i. 22; and Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 392.

ARMS.--_Or, a cross engrailed party per pale gules and sable_.

Present Representative, Sir Richard Brooke, 7th Baronet.




+Gentle.+


CLUTTON OF CHORLTON, IN THE PARISH OF MALPAS.


[Illustration] Ormerod gives no detailed pedigree, but states that
the Cluttons had been settled at Clutton, in the parish of Farndon,
in this county, as early as the 21st of Edward I, and that the manor
of the same place was held by this family in the time of Henry VI.
In the reign of Henry VIII., Roger, third son of Owen Clutton of
Courthyn, having married an heiress of Aldersey of Chorlton, became
seated there, and was the ancestor of the present family. From
Henry, elder brother of this Roger, were descended the Clutton
Brocks late of Pensax in Worcestershire, who were there established
in the seventeenth century.

See Ormerod, ii. 366, 410, and a pedigree of this family in Harleian
MS. 2119.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron ermine, cotised sable, between three
annulets gules_.

Present Representative, Thomas Charlton Clutton, Esq.




LECHE OF CARDEN.


[Illustration] The pedigree commences in the reign of Henry IV. with
John Leche, (said to be a younger brother of the house of Leche of
Chatsworth, in Derbyshire,) who married the heiress of Cawarthyn, or
Carden, and settled there about the year 1475. Some pedigrees,
however, seat the Leches at Carden as early as the twentieth of
Edward III.; and there is also a tradition that the family is
descended from the leche, or chirurgeon, of that monarch himself. It
is remarkable that Nolan has been the family christian name, with
one exception, during thirteen generations.

Younger branch, extinct in 1694, Leche of Mollington, in this
county.

See Harl. MS. 2119, 50, quoted by Ormerod, ii. 385.

ARMS.--_Ermine, on a chief indented gules three crowns or_.

Present Representative, John Hurleston Leche, Esq.




BARNSTON OF CHURTON, IN THE PARISH OF FARNDON.


[Illustration] The descent of this family is not proved beyond
Robert Barnston, of Churton, in the third year of Richard II. But
Hugh de Barnston was lord of a moiety of Barnston in the
twenty-first of Edward I. The pedigree was confirmed in the
Visitations of 1613 and 1663-4.

See Ormerod, ii. 408.

ARMS.--_Azure, a fess indented ermine between six cross-crosslets
fitchée or_. Thomas de Bernaston bore this coat, except that the
crosses were argent. See the Roll of Arms of the Reign of Edward
III.

Present Representative, Roger Barnston, Esq.




ANTROBUS OF ANTROBUS, BARONET 1815.


[Illustration] This is an instance of an ancient family, which,
having gone down in the world, has recovered itself by means of
commercial pursuits, after centuries of comparative obscurity.
Antrobus was sold by Henry Antrobus in the reign of Henry IV., and
repurchased by Edmund Antrobus in 1808; he having proved himself a
descendant of Henry, youngest son of Henry Antrobus above mentioned.
Antrobus of Eaton Hall, in this county, is again a younger branch of
this family.

See Ormerod, i. 487; Lysons's Cheshire, p. 532; Debrett's
Baronetage, ed. 1836, p. 383.

ARMS.--_Lozengy or and azure, on a pale gules three estoiles of the
first_.

Present Representative, Sir Edmund William Romer Antrobus, 2nd
Baronet.




LAWTON OF LAWTON.


[Illustration] It is not improbable that this family is descended
from Robert, a younger son of Vivian de Davenport, who settled at
Lawton in the 50th of Henry III. and assumed the local name: this
assertion is borne out by the arms, which are evidently founded on
those of Davenport. The pedigree is not however traced beyond Hugh
Lawton, who married Isabella, daughter of John Madoc, in the reign
of Henry VI. The manor of Lawton was purchased by William Lawton,
Esq. from King Henry VIII. It had been formerly held by the
Abbey of Chester, to which the Lawtons appear to have been tenants
from a very early period. Younger branch, Lawton of Lake Marsh, in
the county of Cork.

See Ormerod, iii. 11, and Lysons's Cheshire, p. 673.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a fess between three cross-crosslets fitchée
sable a cinquefoil of the first_.

Present Representative, John Lawton, Esq.




COTTON OF COMBERMERE, VISCOUNT COMBERMERE 1826, BARONET 1677.


[Illustration] There are several places called Cotton, and
antiquaries have doubted from which of them the present family is
called. The house usually assigned is that of Cotton, near Wem, in
Shropshire, where Sir Hugh Cotton was seated in the reign of Edward
I., and whose descendant, Roger Cotton, acquired the estate of
Alkington, in the same county, by marriage of the heiress, in the
reign of Richard II. He was the ancestor of Sir George Cotton,
grantee of Combermere after the Dissolution in 1540, from whom the
present family directly descend. Younger branch, extinct in the male
line, but represented in the female line by R. H. Cotton of Etwall,
co. Derby, Esq.

MSS. of the late Mr. Joseph Morris of Shrewsbury. See a different
account of this family in Ormerod, iii. 212; Blakeway's Sheriffs of
Shropshire, p. 104; and Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 611.

ARMS.--_Azure, a chevron between three hawk's lures, or
cotton-hanks, argent_.

Present Representative, Wellington Henry Cotton, 2nd Viscount
Combermere.




CORNWALL.


+Knightly.+


TRELAWNYY OF TRELAWNY, BARONET 1628.


[Illustration] "The most Cornish gentlemen can better vaunt of their
pedigree than their livelyhood," wrote Richard Carew, of Antonie,
Esq. in 1602,--"for that they derive from great antiquitie; and I
make question whether any shire in England, of but equal quantitie,
can muster a like number of faire coat-armours:" and again,

  "By Tre, Pol, and Pen,
  You shall know the Cornish men."

There are two manors called Trelawny in Cornwall, one in the parish
of Alternon, the other in that of Pelynt; the former was the
original seat of the Trelawnys, probably before the Conquest, and
here they remained till the extinction of the cider branch in the
reign of Henry VI. The latter was purchased from Queen Elizabeth by
"Sir Jonathan Trelawny, a knight well spoken, stayed in his cariage,
and of thrifty providence," the head of a younger line of this
family, in the year 1600; and it has ever since remained the seat of
this venerable house. Hamelin, who held Treloen, _i.e._ Trelawny,
under the Earl of Moreton, at the period of the Domesday Survey, is
the first recorded ancestor.

See Leland's Itin., iii. fol. 20; Carew's Survey of Cornwall,
ed. 1602, p. 63 b; Gilbert's Survey of Cornwall, i. 546;
Lysons's Cornwall, pp. 14 and 257; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 87.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron sable_. In the reign of Henry V. an
augmentation was added, viz. _three oak-leaves vert_, borne by Sir
John Trelawny with the ancient coat, in consequence of his having
greatly distinguished himself in the French wars with that monarch.

Present Representative, Sir John Salusbury-Trelawny, 9th Baronet,
late M. P. for Tavistock.




PRIDEAUX OF PLACE, IN THE PARISH OF PADSTOW.


[Illustration] This is the eldest remaining branch of the ancient
family of Prideaux, who trace their descend from Paganus, lord of
Prideaux Castle, in Luxulion, in this county, in the time of William
I.; where the family continued till the latter part of the
fourteenth century, when Prideaux passed by an heiress to the Herles
of West Herle, in Northumberland. The present family, which was
seated at "Place" in the sixteenth century, is sprung from the
Prideauxes of Solden, in Holsworthy, in Devonshire, a branch of
Prideaux of Thuborough in Sutcombe, in the same county, who were
themselves descended from Prideaux of Orcherton in Modbury, also in
Devonshire, where the family was established by marriage with the
heiress of Orcherton in the reign of Henry III.

Younger branch, Prideaux of Netherton, co. Devon, Baronet 1622,
founded by Edmund Prideaux, an eminent lawyer, second son of Roger
Prideaux of Solden.

See Carew, 143 b; Gilbert's Survey of Cornwall, i. 542; Lysons, 252,
cxii.; Wotton's Baronetage, i. 515; Westcote's Devonshire Pedigrees,
p. 470; Prince's Worthies of Devon, ed. 1, p. 307.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron sable, a label of three points gules_.
This was the coat of Orcherton.

Present Representative, Charles Prideaux-Brune, Esq.




BASSET OF TEHIDY.


[Illustration] The immediate ancestor of the Cornish Bassets was
William Basset, who married in 1150 Cecilia, daughter and coheiress
of Alan de Dunstanville, and the daughter of Reginald Fitzhenry,
Earl of Cornwall, natural son of Henry I., who thus acquired the
manor of Tehidy, which has ever since continued the residence of his
descendants of the house of Basset. In the early part of the
sixteenth century, John Basset appears to have been the chief of
this ancient family: he married Frances daughter and coheir of
Arthur Plantagenet, Viscount Lisle, natural son of King Edward IV.
From Arthur, his eldest son, descended the Bassets of Heanton Court
in Devonshire, extinct in the early part of the present century; and
from George, the second son, the house of Tehidy, the elder branch
of which were created Barons de Dunstanville in 1797. Extinct 1855.

Leland mentions "the right goodly lordship of Tehidy, and the
castelet or pile of Bassets on Carnbray Hill."

See Gilbert's Survey of Cornwall, i. 486.

ARMS.--_Or, three bars wavy gules_.

Present Representative, John Francis Basset, Esq.




VYVYAN OF TRELOWARREN, IN THE PARISH OF MAWGAN, BARONET 1644.
ORIGINALLY OF TREVIDERN IN THE PARISH OF ST. BURIAN.


[Illustration] The first recorded ancestor is Sir Vyel Vyvyan,
Knight, who lived in the thirteenth century, and whose descendant
John, having married an heiress of Ferrers, succeeded to the
lordship of Trelowarren in the reign of Edward IV., which has since
continued the seat and residence of this family. The Baronetcy was
conferred by King Charles I. on Sir Richard Vyvyan, as a reward for
his services in the civil wars of that period.

See Leland's Itin. iii. fol. 3; Gilbert's Survey, i. 557; Lysons,
pp. xc. and 218; Polwhele's Cornwall, 1803, vol. i. p. 42; Wotton's
Baronetage, ii. 411.

ARMS.--_Argent, a lion rampant gules, armed sable_.

Present Representative, Sir Richard Rawlinson Vyvyan, 8th Baronet,
late M.P. for Helstone.




MOLESWORTH OF PENCARROW, IN THE PARISH OF EGLOSHAYLE, BARONET 1689.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of the Molesworths of
Ireland, Viscount Molesworth of Swords, in the county of Dublin,
1716. They can be traced to the reign of Edward I. as a knightly
family, but never remained very long in any one county: they have
been seated in Bedfordshire, Huntingdonshire, and Northamptonshire.
Sir Walter de Molesworth, the first recorded ancestor, is said to
have attended Edward I. in his expedition to the Holy Land. The
family estate is believed to have been greatly impoverished by the
profuse entertainment of Queen Elizabeth at Fotheringay, by Antony,
elder brother of John Molesworth, who settled at Pencarrow in the
reign of the same Queen.

See Gilbert's Cornwall, i. 571; Lysons, xcii. 82; Wotton's
Baronetage, iv. 25; Archdall's Lodge, v. 127.

ARMS.--_Vaire, a border gules charged with cross-crosslets or_.

This coat, except that the crosses were argent, was borne by Sir
Walter de Molesworth of co. Huntingdon, as appears by the Roll of
Arms of the reign of Edward II. Sir Gilbert Lyndesey (?) of the same
county bore the present coat.

Present Representative, the Rev. Sir Paul William Molesworth, 10th
Baronet.




+Gentle.+


POLWHELE OF POLWHELE, IN THE PARISH OF ST. CLEMENT.


[Illustration] This venerable family, supposed to be of Saxon
origin, traces its descent to one Drogo or Drew, Chamberlain to the
Empress Maude, and Grantee of the Manor of Polwhele in the year
1140. The family are said to have been seated there even before the
Conquest; there appears however no proof that Drogo was the
descendant of Winus de Polhill, the owner of this place in the time
of Edward the Confessor. The Rev. Richard Polwhele, the historian of
this county, was the representative of the family.

See Polwhele's Cornwall, i. 42; Gilbert's Survey, ii. 239; and
Lysons, pp. cxi. 60.

ARMS.--_Sable, a saltier engrailed ermine_.

Present Representative, T. R. Polwhele, Esq.




TREFUSIS OF TREFUSIS, IN THE PARISH OF MILOR, BARON CLINTON 1299.


[Illustration] From time immemorial this ancient family have been
seated at Trefusis, from whence the name is derived. The pedigree is
traced four generations before the year 1292. The ancient Barony of
Clinton devolved upon this family, (through the Bolles,) on the
death of George third Earl of Orford, in 1791.

See Carew, 150 b; Leland's Itin. iii. 26; Polwhele's Cornwall, i.
42; Gilbert's Cornwall, i. 468.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three wharrow spindles sable_,
which Randle Holmes, in his Academy, p. 288, explains, as a "sort of
Spindle used by women at a distaff put under their girdle, so as
they oftentimes spin therewith going."

Present Representative, Charles Rodolph Trefusis, 18th Baron
Clinton.




BOSCAWEN OF BOSCAWEN-ROSE, IN THE PARISH OF ST. BURIAN, VISCOUNT
FALMOUTH 1720.


[Illustration] Descended from Henry who lived in the reign of King
John, and who took the name of Boscawen from the lordship of
Boscawen-Rose, still the property of the family. In the reign of
Edward III. the Boscawens removed to Tregothnan, their present seat,
in consequence of the marriage of John de Boscawen with Joan,
daughter and heir of John de Tregothnan of that place, in the parish
of St. Michael-Penkevil.

See Gilbert's Survey, i. 452; Lysons, pp. lxxiv. 50; Brydges's
Collins, vi. 62.

ARMS.--_Ermine, a rose gules barbed and seeded proper_. The ancient
arms of the family were, according to Lysons, Vert, a bull-dog
argent, with a chief containing the arms now used.

Present Representative, Evelyn Boscawen, 6th Viscount Falmouth.




TREMAYNE OF HELLIGAN, IN THE PARISH OF ST. EWE.


[Illustration] Tremayne is in the parish of St. Martin, and here the
ancestor of the family, Perys, lived in the reign of Edward III. and
assumed the local name. This estate passed with the heiress of the
elder branch of the family to the Trethurfes, and from them to the
Reskymers, to whom it belonged in Leland's time. A grandson of the
first Tremayne, having married the heiress of Trenchard, of
Collacomb, in Devonshire, removed hither, where his descendants
existed till the extinction of that line in 1808. The founder of the
present family was Richard Tremayne, whose son purchased Helligan in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and who is thus noticed by Carew in
his Survey of this county. "At the adjoining St. Ive, dwelleth
master Richard Tremayne, descended from a younger brother of
Colocome House in Devon, who, being learned in the laws, is yet to
learne, or at least to practise, how he may make other profit
thereby, then by hoarding up treasure of gratitude in the mindful
breasts of poor and rich, on whom he gratis bestoweth the fruits of
his pains and knowledge."

See Leland's Itin. iii. 25, fol. 9; Carew, 104 b; Gilbert's Survey,
ii. 292; Lysons, pp. cxv. 96, 214; Prince's Worthies of Devon, 1st
ed. 569.

ARMS.--_Gules, three dexter arms conjoined at the shoulders and
flexed in triangle or, fists proper_.

Present Representative, John Tremayne, Esq.




KENDALL OF PELYN, IN THE PARISH OF LANLIVERY.


[Illustration] A younger branch of an ancient Cornish family of
which the principal line became extinct in the early part of the
seventeenth century. They were formerly seated at Treworgy in Duloe,
and are traced to Richard Kendall of Treworgy, Burgess for
Launceston in the forty-third of Edward III. Pelyn has been for many
generations the seat of this family, descended from Walter, third
son of John Kendall of Treworgy, who married a daughter and coheir
of Robert Holland, an illegitimate son of a Duke of Exeter. It has
been remarked of this family, that they have perhaps sent more
members to the British Senate than any other in the United Kingdom.

See Carew, 132 c.; Gilbert's Survey, ii. 176; Lysons, pp. cviii.
178.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three dolphins naiant embowed
sable_.

Present Representative, Nicholas Kendall, Esq. M.P. for East
Cornwall.




WREY OF TREBIGH, IN THE PARISH OF ST. IVE, BARONET.

[Illustration] An old Devonshire family, descended from Robert le
Wrey, who lived in the second of Stephen (1136-7), and whose son was
seated at Wrey, in the parish of Moreton-Hamstead, in that county. A
match with the heiress of Killigrew removed the Wreys into Cornwall,
and Trebigh became their principal house, until, by the marriage of
Sir Chichester Wrey, the second Baronet, with one of the
co-heiresses of Edward Bourchier, fourth Earl of Bath, they became
possessed of the noble seat of Tawstock, in Devonshire, the present
usual residence of the family.

See Carew, 117 a; Gilbert's Survey, i. 555; Lysons, lxxxix. 146;
Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 84; Westcote's Devonshire Pedigrees, 567.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess between three pole-axes argent, helved gules_.

Present Representative, Sir Bourchier Palk Wrey, 8th Baronet.




RASHLEIGH OF MENABILLY.


[Illustration] Rashleigh in the parish of Wemworthy, in Devonshire,
gave name this ancient family, the elder line of which became
extinct in the reign of Henry VII.

John Rashleigh, a merchant of Fowey, was the first who settled in
Cornwall, and was in fact the founder of the present family. He is
thus mentioned by Carew, writing in 1602, "I may not passe in
silence the commendable deserts of Master Rashleigh the elder,
descended from a younger brother of an ancient house in Devon,
for his industrious judgement and adventuring in trade of
merchandize first opened a light and way to the townsmen newe
thriveing, and left his sonne large wealth and possessions, who,
with a dayly bettering his estate, converteth the same to
hospitality, and other actions fitting a gentleman well affected to
his God, Prince, and Country."

See Carew, p. 136 a; Gilbert's Survey, ii. 244; Lysons, pp. cxiii.
316.

ARMS.--_Sable, a cross or between, in the first quarter, a Cornish
chough argent, beaked and legged gules, in the second a text T, in
the third and fourth a crescent, all argent_. The Cornish chough and
crescents were added on removing into Cornwall; the elder branch
bore only two text T's in chief with the cross S.

Present Representative, William Rashleigh, Esq.




GLANVILLE OF CATCHFRENCH, IN THE PARISH OF ST. GERMAN.


[Illustration] Descended from the Glanvilles of Halwell, in the
parish of Whitchurch, in Devonshire, where they were settled about
the year 1400. This branch is derived from a younger son of Serjeant
Glanville, the son of Sir John Glanville, one of the Justices of the
Common Pleas in the reign of Elizabeth. Catchfrench became the seat
of the family in 1728.

See Prince's Worthies of Devon, pp. 326 and 339; Gilbert's Survey,
ii. 121; Lysons, pp. civ. 116.

ARMS.--_Azure, three saltiers or_. Present Representative, Francis
Glanville, Esq.




CUMBERLAND.



+Knightly.+


MUSGRAVE OF EDENHALL, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] Originally seated at Musgrave in Westmerland, and
traced to the time of King John, about the year 1204. After the
marriage of Sir Thomas Musgrave, who died in 1469-70, with the
coheiress of Stapleton of Edenhall, he removed to that manor, where
is preserved the celebrated glass vessel called the Luck of
Edenhall, well known from the Duke of Wharton's ballad:

  "God prosper long from being broke
   THE LUCK OF EDENHALL."

See Lysons, ccix. where it is engraved.

Younger branches. The Musgraves of Hayton Castle, in this county,
Baronet of Nova Scotia 1638; and the Musgraves of Tourin, in the
county of Waterford, Baronet 1782.

See Lysons, lxiv. 100; Wotton's Baronetage, i. 74, iv. 354; and St.
George's Visitation of Westmerland, printed 1853, p. 5, &c.

ARMS.--_Azure, six annulets or_.

Monsire de Musgrave bore this coat, as appears by the Roll of the
reign of Edward III., and Thomas Musgrave in that of Richard II.
(Rolls of those dates.)

Present Representative, Sir George Musgrave, 10th Baronet.




HUDDLESTONE OF HUTTON-JOHN.

[Illustration] An ancient Northern family, said to be of Saxon
descent, originally of Huddleston in Yorkshire, and afterwards of
Millom Castle in this county, from an heiress of that name, where
the elder line flourished till its extinction in 1745. Andrew, a
younger son of John Huddleston of Millom, who lived in the reign of
Henry VIII., married the heiress of Hutton of Hutton-John, and was
the ancestor of the present family.

A younger branch of the Huddlestons were fixed in the county of
Cambridge by a match with the illustrious House of Neville. Sir
William Huddleston having married Isabel, fifth daughter of John,
Marquess of Montecute, became possessed, on the partition of the
Neville estates in 1496, of the manor of Sawston, still the
inheritance of this line of the family.

For Sir John Huddleston, so much trusted by Queen Mary, see Fuller's
Worthies, 1st ed. p. 168.

John Huddleston, the priest instrumental in saving the life of
Charles II, and the same who attended him on his deathbed, was
second son of Andrew Huddleston, of Hutton-John. This family
afterwards became Protestants, and were active promoters of the
Revolution.

For a curious account of Sawston and the Huddlestons, see Gent. Mag.
for 1815, pt. 2. pp. 25 and 120; Lysons's Cambridgeshire, p. 248,
and Cumberland, p. lxxiv. and 107; also Banks's Stemmata Anglicana,
"Barones Rejecti," and the Visitation of Cambridgeshire 1619, fol.
1840, p. 19.

ARMS.--_Gules, fretty argent_. This coat was borne by Sir John de
Hodelestone in the reign of Edward II., Sir Adam the same, with _a
border indented or_, Sir Richard with _a label azure_, Sir Richard,
the nephew, with _a label or_. (Roll of the reign of Edw. II. co.
York.)

Present Representative, W. Huddleston, Esq.




+Gentle.+


IRTON OF IRTON.


[Illustration] A family of very great antiquity, and resident at
Irton, on the river Irt, from whence the name is derived, as early
as the reign of Henry I. The Manor of Irton has belonged also to the
ancestors of Mr. Irton almost from the time of the Conquest.

See Lysons, lxxv. 119.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess sable, in chief three mullets gules_.

Present Representative, Samuel Irton, Esq. late M.P. for the Western
Division of Cumberland.




BRISCOE OF CROFTON, IN THE PARISH OF THURSBY, BARONET 1782.

[Illustration] Originally of Briscoe near Carlisle, where the family
were seated three generations before the reign of Edward I. Crofton,
which came by an heiress of that name, has been since the year 1390
the residence of the Briscoe family.

See Lysons, lxvi. 159.

ARMS.--_Argent, three greyhounds currant sable_.

In Clutterbuck's Hertfordshire, i. 158, there is a pedigree of a
younger branch of this family, who were seated at Aldenham, in that
county, previous to 1736.

Present Representative, Sir Robert Briscoe, 3rd Baronet.




DYKES OF DOVENBY, IN THE PARISH OF BRIDEKIRK.


[Illustration] The name, originally "Del Dykes," is derived from the
two lines of Roman wall in "Burgh," from whence the family at a
remote period originated; Ramerus de Dikes, who lived before the
reign of Henry II., is the first supposed ancestor. The pedigree is
regularly traced three generations before the 50th of Edward III. to
the present time. In the Wars of the Roses the Dykes's, like
most other families in the Northern counties, were Lancastrian; and
in the Civil Wars of the seventeenth century, devoted Royalists, and
sufferers for their allegiance to the Crown. Dovenby, formerly the
seat of the Lamplughs, came by marriage in the present century. The
Manor of Warthole or Wardhill, purchased in the reign of Henry VI.,
and still in the family, was the former residence. Waverton,
acquired in the 10th of Edward II., exchanged in 1619, and
Distington, acquired in the 7th of Richard II., and afterwards
alienated, were more ancient possessions.

See Lysons, lxxii. 36; Hutchinson's Cumberland, ii. 98 and note;
Burn's Cumberland, ii. 49, and i. 157. I am obliged to the present
Representative for additions to this account.

ARMS.--_Or, three cinquefoils sable_. Monsr. Willm. de Dyks bore,
_Argent, a fess vaire or and gules, between three water bougets
sable_, as appears by the Roll of the reign of Richard II.

Present Representative, Frecheville-Lawson Ballantine-Dykes,
Esq.




DERBYSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


GRESLEY OF DRAKELOW, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] "In point of _stationary_ antiquity hardly any
families in the kingdom can compare with the Gresleys," wrote the
Topographer in 1789. In this county certainly none can claim
precedence to the house of Drakelow; descended from Nigel, mentioned
in Domesday, called de Stafford, and said to have been a younger son
of Roger de Toni, standard-bearer in Normandy, it was very soon
after the Conquest established in Derbyshire, first at Gresley, and
immediately afterwards at Drakelow, in the same parish. The present
is a younger branch, seated at Nether Seale, in Leicestershire, at
the beginning of the eighteenth century.

See Leland's Itinerary in Coll. Topog. et Genealog. iii. 339;
Nichols's History of Leicestershire, iii. pt. 2, p. 1009*; the
Topographer, i. 432, 455, 474; Lysons, lxiii.; Wotton's Baronetage,
i. 121; and Erdeswick's Staffordshire, ed 1844, p. 208.

ARMS.--_Vaire, ermine and gules_. Allusive no doubt to the Ferrers,'
under whom Drakelow was held anno 1200, by the service of a bow,
quiver, and 12 arrows. The same coat was borne by Sir Geffray de
Greseley in the reign of Edward I., and by Sir Peres de Gresle, in
the reign of Edward II. (Rolls.) John de Greseley bore simply,
_Vair, argent and gules_. (Roll Ric. II.)

Present Representative, Sir Thomas Gresley, 10th Baronet.




FITZHERBERT OF NORBURY.


[Illustration] This ancient Norman house was seated at Norbury, by
the grant of the Prior of Tutbury, in 1125, 25 Henry I. The
principal male line becoming extinct in 1649, the succession went to
a younger branch descended from William, third son of the celebrated
Sir Anthony Fitzherbert the judge, who had seated themselves at
Swinnerton, in Staffordshire, still the residence of this family.

Younger branch. Fitzherbert of Tissington, Baronet 1783, descended
from Nicholas, younger son of John Fitzherbert of Somersall. See
Topographer for a curious account of the pedigree and monuments, ii.
225, and Lysons, 217; for Fitzherbert of Tissington, Topographer and
Genealogist, i. 362; Gent. Mag. lxvii. p. 645; Topographer, iii. 57;
and Brydges's Collins, ix. 156.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chief vaire or and gules, over all a bend sable_.
This coat is also complimentary to Ferrers. The Tissington
Fitzherberts have assumed a different coat, viz. _Gules, three lions
rampant or_, from a fanciful notion of their descent from Henry
Fitzherbert, Lord Chamberlain 5th Stephen, ancestor of the Herberts
of Dean. The lions were assumed as early as 1569. See the Visitation
of Derbyshire.

Present Representative, Basil Fitzherbert, Esq.




CURZON OF KEDLESTON, BARON SCARSDALE 1761, BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] This ancient family was seated at Kedleston as early
as the reign of Henry I. It is said to be of Breton origin, and
descended from Geraline, a great benefactor to the Abbey of
Abingdon, in Berkshire, in which county the Curzons held lands soon
after the Conquest.

Younger branches. Curzon Earl Howe 1821; Curzon of Parham, Sussex.

Extinct branches. Curzon of Croxall and Water-Perry, co. Oxford, and
of Letheringset, Norfolk.

See Lysons, lii.; Brydges's Collins, vii. 294; Wotton's Baronetage,
ii. 243.

ARMS.--_Argent, a bend sable, charged with three popinjays or,
collared gules_, borne by Monsr. Roger Curson in the reign of
Richard II. Sir John Cursoun bore, _Argent, a bend gules bezantée_,
in that of Edward II. (Rolls.) According to Burton's Collections
quoted by Wotton, the more ancient coat was, _Vair, or and gules, a
border sable charged with popinjays argent_: this was in compliment
to William Earl Ferrers and Derby, who had granted to Stephen Curson
the manor of Fauld, co. Stafford.

Present Representative, the Rev. Alfred Nathaniel Holden Curzon, 4th
Baron Scarsdale.




VERNON OF SUDBURY, BARON VERNON 1762.


[Illustration] The Vernons were originally of Cheshire, and Barons
of Shipbrooke, but became connected with Derbyshire by the heiress
of Avenell's marriage with Richard Vernon in the 12th century; their
son died s.p.m. leaving a daughter and heiress married to Gilbert le
Francis, whose son Richard took the name of Vernon, seated himself
at Haddon Hall in this county, and was the ancestor of the different
branches of the House of Vernon. The Sudbury Vernons settled there
in the reign of Henry VIII., and, by the extinction of the other
lines, became in the end the chief of the family. Few houses have
been more connected together by intermarriage than the Vernons.

Younger branches. The Vernon-Harcourts, now of Nuneham Courteney,
co. Oxon; the Vernons of Hilton, Staffordshire; and the
Vernon-Wentworths, of Wentworth Castle, Yorkshire.

See Lysons, liii.; Brydges's Collins, vii. 396; Topographer, ii.
217, for inscriptions to the Vernons at Sudbury, which came from the
heiress of Montgomery: for Vernon of Houndhill, in the parish of
Henbury, and of Harleston in Clifton Camville, see Shaw's
Staffordshire, i. 87, 399, and the Topographer, ii. 11: and for
Vernon of Tonge, Topographer, iii. 109, and Eyton's Antiquities of
Shropshire, vol. ii. p. 191.

ARMS.--_Argent, fretty sable_. This coat, with _a quarter gules_,
was borne by Monsr. Richard Vernon in the reign of Richard II.
(Roll.)

Present Representative, George John Warren, 5th Baron Vernon.




POLE OF RADBORNE.


[Illustration] Originally from Newborough in Staffordshire, but from
the fourteenth century established, through female descent, first at
Hartington, and afterwards at Wakebridge, in this county. Radborne
was inherited from the Chandos's, through the Lawtons, also in the
fourteenth century. It came to the Chandos family from an heiress of
Ferrers or "Fitz-Walkelin."

See Leland's Itinerary, vol. viii. fol. 70 a, and vol. iv. fol. 6;
the Topographer, i. 280; Topographer and Genealogist, i. 176; and
Lysons, xciv.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three crescents gules_.

Present Representative, Edward Sacheverell Chandos Pole, Esq.




CAVENDISH OF HARDWICK, DUKE OF DEVONSHIRE 1694, EARL 1618, BARON
1605.

[Illustration] This family was originally from Cavendish Overhall,
near Clare, in Suffolk, and is descended from Sir John Cavendish,
who in the reign of Edward III. was Chief Justice of the King's
Bench. It was John, a younger son of the Judge, who killed Wat
Tyler, and from him the family are descended. But it was Sir William
Cavendish, younger brother of George Cavendish, who had been
Gentleman Usher to Wolsey, who may be called the real founder
of the Cavendishes, by the great share of abbey lands which he
obtained at the Dissolution of Monasteries, "and afterwards," adds
Brydges, "by the abilities, rapacity, and good fortune of Elizabeth,
his widow," the celebrated Countess of Shrewsbury. The Cavendishes
first settled in Derbyshire by the marriage of this Sir William with
"Bess of Hardwick," in 1544.

See Topographer, iii. 306; Brydges's Collins, i. 302; Collins's
Noble Families.

ARMS.--_Sable, three buck's heads cabossed argent, attired or_.
Monsr. Andrew Cavendysh of this family bore, _Sable, three crosses
botonnée fitchée or_, 2 _and_ 1. (Roll Ric. II.)

Present Representative, William Cavendish, 7th Duke of Devonshire,
and 2nd Earl of Burlington.




HARPUR OF CALKE, BARONET 1626 (CALLED CREWE).

[Illustration] This family was originally of Chesterton in
Warwickshire, where it is traced as early as the reigns of Henry I.
and II.

In right of Elianor, daughter and heir to William Grober, descended
from Richard de Rushall, of Rushall, in Staffordshire, the Harpurs
were afterwards seated at that place, but had no connection with
Derbyshire till the reign of Elizabeth. Calke was purchased by Henry
Harpur, Esq. in 1621.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, 2nd ed, vol. i. 478; Shaw's History of
Staffordshire, ii. 69; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 1; Lysons,
lxiii.

ARMS.--_Argent, a lion rampant within a border engrailed sable_.
This was the coat of Rushall; the arms of Harpur were a plain cross.

Present Representative, Sir John Harpur Crewe, 9th Baronet.




BURDETT OF FOREMARK, BARONET 1618.


[Illustration] The pedigree begins with Hugo de Burdet, who came
into England with William I., and was lord of the manor of Loseby,
in Leicestershire, in 1066. Arrow, in the county of Warwick, which
came from the heiress of Camvile the 9th of Edward II., was long the
seat of the Burdetts, but they had long before, as Dugdale shows,
been connected by property with that county, William Burdett having
founded the cell of Ancote, near Sekindon, in the fifth of Henry II.
The manor of Arrow, and many other estates of this family, carried
by an heiress to the Conways in the reign of Henry VII., became the
fruitful cause of many lawsuits, which were not finally settled till
the end of the reign of Henry VIII. See Dugdale for the curious
details. Foremark was inherited from the heiress of Francis in 1602.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, 2nd edit. ii. 847; Erdeswick's
Staffordshire, ed. 1844, 462; Nichols's Leicestershire, iii. pt. 1.
351; Wotton's Baronetage, i. 327; and Lysons.

ARMS.--_Azure, two bars or_. Sir William Burdett bore this coat in
the reign of Edward II. Sir Robert the same, _in the upper bar three
martlets gules_. (Roll Edw. II. under Leicestershire.) Sir Richard
the same, with an _orle of martlets gules_. (Roll E. III.) Monsr,
John Burdet the same, _each bar charged with three martlets gules_.
(Roll Richard II.)

Present Representative, Sir Robert Burdett, 6th Baronet.




CAVE OF STRETTON, BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] A family of great antiquity, which can be traced to
the Conquest; originally of South and North Cave in Yorkshire. In
the fifteenth century they removed into Northamptonshire and
Leicestershire, and were long of Stanford, in the former county. The
elder line of the Caves becoming extinct in 1810, the Baronetcy
devolved on a younger branch, descended in the female line from the
Brownes of Stretton, and from hence their connection with
Derbyshire.

See Nichols's History of Leicestershire, vol. iv. part i. 350, for a
curious account of this family, and for their monuments in Stanford
Church, (the earliest of which is that for John Cave, who died in
1471;) Pedigree at p. 371; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 164; Lysons,
xviii.

ARMS.--_Azure, fretty argent_. This coat was borne by "Monsire de
Cave;" see the Roll of Arms of the reign of Edward III.

Present Representative, Sir Mylles Cave-Browne-Cave, 11th
Baronet.




COLVILE OF LULLINGTON.


[Illustration] This is an ancient Suffolk and Cambridgeshire family,
and can be traced to the time of Henry I. The Colviles, Barons of
Culross, in Scotland, are descended from a younger brother of the
second progenitor of the family.

The manor of Newton-Colvile, acquired by the marriage of Sir Roger
Colvile of Carleton Colvile in Suffolk, called "_The Rapacious
Knight_," with the heiress of De Marisco, and held under the Bishop
of Ely, continued in the Colviles from a period extending nearly
from the Conquest to the year 1792, when it was sold, and the
representative of this family, Sir Charles Colvile, settled in
Derbyshire in consequence of his marriage with Miss Bonnel of
Duffield. The head of the family was on the Royalist side in the
reign of Charles I., and one of the intended Knights of the Royal
Oak.

See Lysons's Cambridgeshire, 242; Blomefield's Norfolk; and Watson's
History of Wisbeach.

ARMS.--_Azure, a lion rampant or, a label of five points gules_.
This coat, with the lion argent, was borne by Sir Geoffry de
Colville in the reign of Edward II., and without the label by Monsr.
John Colvyle in that of Richard II. (Rolls of Arms of the dates.)
Sir Roger de Colvile bore the present coat with a label of three
points only, in 1240; as appears by his seal to a deed of that date.

Present Representative, Charles R. Colvile, Esq. M.P. for South
Derbyshire.




+Gentle.+


COKE OF TRUSLEY.

[Illustration] This is a younger branch of the old house of the
Cokes of Trusley, a family of considerable antiquity. The elder line
became extinct in 1718. The present family are descended from the
Cokes of Suckley in Worcestershire. The Cokes were originally of
Staffordshire, but settled in Derbyshire in consequence of a match
with one of the coheiresses of Odingsells of Trusley, in the middle
of the fifteenth century.

There is a younger branch of this family at Lower Moor, in
Herefordshire. The Cokes of Melbourn were also a younger branch,
from whom the Lambs, Viscounts Melbourne, were descended.

See Lysons, lxxxi.

ARMS.--_Gules, three crescents and a canton or_.

Present Representative, Edward Thomas Coke, Esq.




THORNHILL OF STANTON, IN THE PARISH OF YOULGRAVE.


[Illustration] Descended from the Thornhills of Thornhill in the
Peak, where they were seated as early as the seventh of Edward I.
Stanton was inherited from an heiress of Bache in 1697.

See Lysons, xcvii.

ARMS, confirmed in 1734.--_Gules, two bars gemelles_ _and a chief
argent, thereon a mascle sable_. This coat, without the mascle, was
borne by M. Bryan de Thornhill in the reign of Edward III. (Roll.)

Present Representative, William Pole Thornhill, Esq. late M.P. for
North Derbyshire.




ABNEY OF MEASHAM.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of a family who were seated
at Willersley, by a match with the heiress of Ingwardby at the
beginning of the fifteenth century. Willersley was the property of
the late Sir Charles Abney Hastings by female descent. Measham is a
purchase of about a century.

See Lysons, cxii.

ARMS.--_Or, on a chief gules a lion passant argent_. Lysons however
gives, _Argent, on a cross sable five bezants._

Present Representative, William Wotton-Abney, Esq.




DEVONSHIRE.



+Knightly.+


FULFORD OF FULFORD, IN THE PARISH OF DUNSFORD.


[Illustration] There is every reason to believe that the ancestors
of this venerable family have resided at Fulford from the time of
the Conquest. Three knights of the house distinguished themselves in
the wars of the Holy Land. William de Fulford, who held Fulford in
the reign of Richard I., is the first ascertained ancestor. Sir
Baldwin Fulford, a leading Lancastrian, was beheaded at Bristol in
1461.

See Prince's Worthies of Devon, ed. 1701, p. 298, for description of
Fulford; Westcote's Devonshire Pedigrees, p. 612; Lysons, cxlv. 171.

ARMS.--_Gules, a chevron argent_.

Present Representative, Baldwin Fulford, Esq.



COURTENAY OF POWDERHAM CASTLE, EARL OF DEVON 1553, RESTORED 1831.


[Illustration] This illustrious house is descended from Reginald de
Courtenay, who came over to England with Henry II. A.D. 1151, and,
having married the daughter and heiress of the hereditary sheriff of
Devonshire, became immediately connected with this county. The
Earldom of Devon was first conferred on the Courtenays in 1335,
by reason of their descent from William de Redvers, Earl of Devon,
The Powderham branch springs from Sir Philip, sixth son of Hugh
second Earl of Devon.

See Brydges's Collins, vi. 214; Lysons, lxxxvii.; Westcote's
Devonshire Pedigrees, 570, &c.; Journal of Arch. Institute, x. 52;
and Sir Harris Nicolas's Earldom of Devon.

ARMS.--_Or, three torteauxes_.

This coat, with a bend azure, was borne by Sir Philip de Courtenay
in the reign of Edward II. (Roll.) And the same, with a _label
azure_, by Hugh de Courtenay in 1300. See the Roll of Carlaverock,
and Sir Harris Nicolas's notes, p. 193. This label was, he remarks,
charged by respective branches of the family with mitres, crescents,
lozenges, annulets, fleurs-de-lis, guttees, and plates, and with a
bend over all. See also Willement's Heraldic Notices in Canterbury
Cathedral.

Present Representative, William Reginald Courtenay, 11th Earl of
Devon.




EDGCUMBE OF EDGCUMBE, IN THE PARISH OF MILTON ABBOT'S.

[Illustration] Richard Edgcumbe was Lord of Edgcumbe in 1292, and
was the direct ancestor of this venerable family, the present
representative being twentieth in lineal descent from this first
Richard.

In the reign of Edward III. William Edgcumbe, second son of the
house of Edgcumbe, having married the heiress of Cotehele, in the
parish of Calstock, removed into Cornwall, and was the ancestor of
the Edgcumbes of Cotehele and Mount Edgcumbe, Earls of Mount
Edgcumbe (1789).

Another younger branch was of Brompton, or Brampton, in Kent.

See Prince's Worthies of Devon, ed. 1701, p. 281; Gilbert's Survey
of Cornwall, 4to. 1820, vol. i. p. 444; Carew's Cornwall, 1st ed.,
p. 99 b and 114 a; Brydges's Collins, v. 306; and Lysons's Cornwall,
lxxiii. 212, 53.

ARMS.--_Gules, on a bend ermine cotised or three boar's heads couped
argent_.

Present Representative, Richard D. Edgcumbe, Esq.




CHICHESTER OF YOULSTON, IN THE PARISH OF SHERWILL, FORMERLY OF
RALEGH, IN THE PARISH OF PILTON; BARONET 1641.

[Illustration] This ancient family is said to have taken its name
from Cirencester, in Gloucestershire, the residence of its remote
ancestors. The Chichesters were, however, as early as the reign of
Henry III. of the county of Devon, although Ralegh came to them at a
later period from an heiress of that name; Youlston, the present
seat, from an heiress of Beaumont in the time of Henry VII. John de
Cirencester, living in the 20th of Henry I. is said to have been the
first recorded ancestor.

Younger branches. Chichester of Hall, in Bishop's-Towton; seated at
Hall, from an heiress of that name in the 15th century, Chichester
of Arlington, since the reign of Henry VII.; and Chichester, Marquis
of Donegal, descended from Edward, 3rd son of Sir John Chichester,
in the reign of Elizabeth, &c.

See Prince's Worthies of Devon, ed. 1701, pp. 135, 199; Westcote's
Devonshire, 303, and Pedigrees, 604, &c., Wotton's Baronetage,
ii. 226; Brydges's Collins, viii. 177; Shaw's Staffordshire, i.
374; Lysons, cxi. 440; and Archdall's Lodge's Peerage, ii. 314.

ARMS.--_Cheeky or and gules, a chief vair_.

Present Representative, Sir Arthur Chichester, 8th Baronet.



FORTESCUE OF CASTLE HILL, EARL FORTESCUE 1789.


[Illustration] Like the Chichesters, an ancient and wide-spreading
family, settled at Wymodeston, now called Winston, in the parish of
Modbury, in the year 1209. "This was," writes Sir William Pole, "the
most ancient seat of the Fortescues, in whose possession it
continued from the days of King John to the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth."

There are many younger branches of this family, both in England and
Ireland, "to rank which in their seniority, and by delineating the
descent to give every man his dew place, surpasseth, I freely
confesse, my ability at the present." (Westcote's MSS. quoted by
The Topographer, i. 178.) The great glory of this house is Sir John
Fortescue, Lord Chief Justice of England in the reign of Henry VI.
and the author of' the work "_Of absolute and limited Monarchy._"

Among the principal younger branches were the Fortescues of Buckland
Filleigh and Fortescue of Fallopit in this county, both extinct in
the male line, and the Fortescues of the county of Louth in Ireland,
represented by the Barons Clermont.

See Westcote's Devonshire Pedigrees, 498, 625, &c.; Prince's
Worthies, ed. 1701, 304; Brydges's Collins, v. 335; Lysons, lxxxv.

ARMS.--_Azure, a bend engrailed argent cotised or_.

Present Representative, Hugh Fortescue, 3rd Earl Fortescue.




CARY OF TORR-ABBEY, IN THE PARISH OF TOR-MOHUN.


[Illustration] An ancient family, the history of which however is
involved in great obscurity, supposed by some to have come from
Castle Cary, in Somersetshire, by others from Cary, in the parish of
St. Giles's in the Heath, near Launceston. It was certainly of the
latter place in the reign of Edward I.

Cockington in this county was, previous to the Civil Wars of the
seventeenth century, the principal seat of the family. Torr-Abbey
was purchased by Sir George Cary, Knt. in 1662.

Younger branches. Cary of Follaton, in this county. In the county of
Donegal and in that of Cork, and in Guernsey, there are families
which claim to be branches of the House of Cary. The present
Viscounts Falkland, and the extinct Barons Hunsdon, descend from the
second marriage of Sir William Cary, of Cockington, in the time of
Henry VII.

See Prince's Worthies, p. 196; Westcote's Devonshire Families, 507,
&c.; Lysons, cxxxviii. 524; and Clutterbuck's Hertfordshire, i. 129.
For Cary Viscount Falkland, see The Herald and Genealogist, vol.
iii.; and for Cary Baron Hunsdon, the same work, vol. iv.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend sable three roses of the first seeded
proper_, said to have been the arms of a Knight of Arragon,
vanquished by Sir Robert Cary in single combat in the reign of Henry
V.

Present Representative, Robert Shedden Sulyarde Cary, Esq.




CAREW OF HACCOMBE, BARONET 1661.


[Illustration] About the year 1300, by the marriage of Sir John de
Carru with a coheiress of Mohun, this ancient family first became
connected with the county of Devon. The Carews are descended from
Gerald, son of Walter de Windsor, who lived in the reign of Henry
I., which Walter was son of Otho, in the time of William the
Conqueror. Haccombe was inherited from an heiress of Courtenay, and
was settled on this the second branch of the family in the fifteenth
century.

The extinct families of Carew of Bickleigh and Carew Earl of Totnes
were descended from Sir Thomas Carew, elder brother of Nicholas, the
first of the Haccombe line. The present Lord Carew, of Ireland,
represents, in fact the elder line of this family, being descended
from a nephew of the Earl of Totnes. Carew of Antony, Baronet
(1641), now extinct, was a younger branch of the house of Haccombe.

See Leland's Itin., iii. fol. 40; Prince's Worthies of Devon, 148,
176, 204; Westcote's Devonshire, 440; Pedigrees, 528; Wotton's
Baronetage, iii. 323; Lysons, cxiv. For notices of a branch of this
family formerly seated in the county of Cork, see Coll. Topog. and
Genealog. v. 95; see also Nicolas's Roll of Carlaverock, p. 154, and
Maclean's Life of Sir Peter Carew, London, 8vo. 1857.

ARMS.--_Or, three lions passant sable_. This coat was borne by Sir
Nicholas Carru in 1300. (Roll of Carlaverock.) Sir John de Carru,
the same, _with a label gules_, in the reign of Edward II; and by M.
de Carrew in that of Edward III. (Rolls.)

Present Representative, Sir Walter Palk Carew, 8th Baronet.




KELLY OF KELLY.


[Illustration] Kelly is a manor in the hundred of Lifton and deanery
of Tavistock, and lies on the borders of Cornwall, about six miles
from Tavistock. The manor and advowson have been in the family of
Kelly at least since the time of Henry II., and here they have
uninterruptedly resided since that very early period.

See Westcote's Pedigrees, p. 540; Lysons, cl. 296.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three billets gules_.

Present Representative, Arthur Kelly, Esq.




POLE OF SHUTE, BARONET 1628.


[Illustration] This is an ancient Cheshire family, who settled in
the county of Devon in the reign of Richard II., Arthur Pole, their
ancestor, having married the heiress of Pole of Honiton. The
representative of the family, the learned antiquary Sir William
Pole, resided at Chute in the early part of the seventeenth century,
though the fee of that manor, once the inheritance of the noble
family of Bonvile, did not belong to the Poles till it was purchased
by Sir John Pole, Baronet, in 1787.

See Prince's Worthies of Devon, p. 504; Wotton's Baronetage, ii.
124; Lysons, cix. 442.

ARMS.--_Azure, semée of fleurs-de-lis or, a lion rampant argent_.

Present Representative, Sir John George Reeve De-la-Pole Pole, 8th
Baronet.



CLIFFORD OF UGBROOKE, BARON CLIFFORD OF CHUDLEIGH 1672.


[Illustration] An illustrious Norman family, traced to the Conquest,
of which the extinct Earls of Cumberland were the chiefs, first
connected with Devonshire by the marriage of Thomas, fourth grandson
of Sir Louis Clifford, who died in 1404, with a daughter of John
Thorpe of King's Teignton.

Ugbrooke came from an heiress of Courtenay, in the reign of
Elizabeth. The peerage was conferred by Charles II. on the Lord
Treasurer Clifford, one of the celebrated CABAL.

Sir Thomas Clifford-Constable, Baronet (1815), represents a younger
branch of this family, descended from Thomas, fourth son of the
fourth Lord Clifford.

See "Cliffordiana," by the Rev. G. Oliver, Exeter, 8vo., and
"Collectanea Cliffordiana," Paris, 1817, 8vo.; Erdeswick's
Staffordshire, edit. 1844, 73; and for the Earls of Cumberland, and
their ancestors the Lords Clifford, see Whitaker's admirable account
in his "Craven," ed. 1812, 240, &c., see also Queen's Coll. Ox. MS.
cv. for "Evidences of the Cliffords;" Brydges's Collins, vii. 117,
and Lysons, xci.; and for the early history of this family, Eyton's
Antiquities of Shropshire, vol. v. p. 146.

ARMS.--_Checky or and azure, a fess gules_. Borne by Roger de
Clifford in the reign of Henry III., and by Walter de Clifford at
the same period, instead of _a fess, a bend gules_. Sir Robert
de Clifford, in the reigns of Edward II. and III. bore the present
coat. Sir Lewis de Clifford, in the time of Richard II. differenced
his coat by a _border gules_. (Rolls.) See also the Roll of
Carlaverock, p. 195.

Present Representative, Hugh Charles Clifford, 8th Baron Clifford of
Chudleigh.




HARINGTON OF DARTINGTON (CALLED CHAMPERNOWNE).


[Illustration] This is a younger line of the ancient and noble
family of Harington, formerly of Ridlington, in the county of
Rutland, created Baronet in 1611, and still represented by Sir John
Edward Harington, the tenth Baronet: the name is local, from
Harington in Cumberland, from whence Robert Harington was called in
the reign of Henry III.

A younger branch of the Haringtons was fixed at Ridlington by
purchase in the first year of Philip and Mary; but had been seated
at Exton in the same county from the reign of Henry VII. Sir James
Harington, third Baronet, was attainted in the 13th of Charles II.,
having been named as one of the Judges of his sovereign Charles I.
He sat however only one day, and refused to sign the fatal warrant.
Dartington, the ancient seat of the Champernowne family, was carried
by an heiress, Jane, only daughter of Arthur Champernowne, Esq., the
last heir male of the family, to the Rev. Richard Harington, second
son of Sir James Harington, Baronet, grandfather of the present
representative, and who assumed her name.

See Wright's History of the County of Rutland, pp. 48, 108; Blore's
Rutlandshire; and Courthope's Debrett's Baronetage, p. 10.
ARMS.--_Sable, fretty argent_.

Present Representative, Arthur Champernowne, Esq.



+Gentle.+


BASTARD OF KITLEY, IN THE PARISH OF YEALMTON, OR YALMETON.


[Illustration] Descended from Robert Bastard, who held several
manors in this county in the reign of William I. For several
generations Efford, in the parish of Egg-Buckland, was the seat of
this family, but in the early part of the seventeenth century the
hereditary estates were sold, and they were of Wolston and Garston,
in West Allington. About the beginning of the eighteenth century
Kitley, the present seat, was inherited from the heiress of
Pollexfen.

In 1779, William Bastard, Esq., the representative of this family,
was gazetted a Baronet: the honour, which was declined by Mr.
Bastard, was intended as an acknowledgment of his services in
raising men to defend Plymouth in 1779.

See Lysons, cxxxi, and 577.

ARMS.--_Or, a chevron azure_.

Present Representative, Baldwin John Pollexfen Bastard, Esq.




ACLAND OF ACLAND, BARONET 1644.


[Illustration] Acland, which gave name to this ancient family, is
now a farm in the parish of Landkey; it is thus described in
Westcote's Devonshire, (p. 290:) "Then Landkey, or Londkey; and
therein Acland, or rather Aukeland, as taking name from a grove of
oaks, for by such an one the house is seated, and hath given name
and long habitation to the _clarous_ family of the Aclands, which
have many ages here flourished in a worshipful degree." Hugh de
Accalen is the first recorded ancestor; he was living in 1155; from
whom the present Sir Thomas Dyke Acland is twenty-second in lineal
descent. Killerton, in the parish of Broad-Clist, purchased at the
beginning of the seventeenth century, is the present seat of the
family. Columb-John, an ancient Elizabethan mansion in the same
parish, now pulled down, was the earlier residence of the Aclands,
who were remarkable for their royalty during the Civil Wars.

Younger branch. Acland of Fairfield, Baronet 1818.

See Gilbert's Survey of Cornwall, i. 559; Prince's Worthies of
Devon, p. 18; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 407; and Lysons, cxiii.

ARMS.--_Checky argent and sable, a fess gules_. This coat was borne
by M. John Acland, as appears by the Roll of Arms of the reign of
Richard II. According to Prince, _three oak-leaves on a bend between
two lions rampant_, was also borne at this time by this family.

Present Representative, Sir Thomas Dyke-Acland, 10th Baronet.




BAMFYLDE OF POLTIMORE, BARON POLTIMORE 1831, BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] John Baumfield, the ancestor of this family, became
possessed of Poltimore in the reign of Edward I.; but the pedigree
can be traced three generations before that period.

A younger branch was of Hardington in Somersetshire, extinct about
the beginning of the eighteenth century.

For the story of the heir of the Bamfyldes taken away and recovered,
see Prince's Worthies of Devon, p. 121; see also Westcote's
Devonshire Pedigrees, p. 492; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 188; and
Lysons, cx.

ARMS.--_Or, on a bend gules three mullets argent_.

Present Representative, Augustus Frederick George Warwick Bampfylde,
2nd Baron Poltimore.



NORTHCOTE OF PYNES, BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] Descended from Galfridus, who was of Northcote, in
the parish of East-Downe, in the twelfth century. Hayne, in the
parish of Newton St. Cyres, was afterwards acquired by marriage with
the heiress of Drew. Pynes was inherited from the heiress of'
Stafford, originally Stowford, early in the last century.

See Lysons, pp. cx. 361, 545, and Wotton's Baronetage; ii. 206.

ARMS.--_Argent, three cross-crosslets botonny in bend sable_. Used
on seals in the reign of Henry VI. The earliest coat, used till the
time of Edward III. was _Or, a chief gules fretty of the first_.
Afterwards, _Argent, a fess between three cross molines sable_. In
1571, Robert Cooke, Clarencieux, is said to have granted, according
to the foolish custom of the day, another coat to Walter Northcote
of Crediton, grandfather or uncle of the 1st Baronet, viz.: _Or, on
a pale argent three bends sable_. Sir William Pole mentions another
coat, _Or, three spread eaglets gules, on a chief sable three
escallops of the first_. But this appears to be a mistake.--From the
information of the present Baronet.

Present Representative, Sir Stafford Henry Northcote, 8th Baronet,
M.P. for Stamford.




FURSDON OF FURSDON, IN THE PARISH OF CADBURY.


[Illustration] From the days of Henry III. if not from an earlier
period, this ancient family has resided at the place from whence the
name is derived.

See the Visitation of Devon, 1620, Harl. MS. 1080. fo. 4; Lysons,
cxlv. and 92.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron azure between three fireballs proper_.

Present Representative, George Fursdon, Esq.




STRODE OF NEWENHAM, IN THE PARISH OF PLYMPTON ST. MARY.


[Illustration] Originally of Strode, in the parish of Ermington,
where Adam de Strode, the first recorded ancestor, was seated in the
reign of Henry III, In that of Henry IV. by the marriage of the
coheiress of Newenham of Newenham, they became possessed of that
place, since the seat of the family. "A right ancient and honourable
family," says Prince; it may also be called an historical one,
William Strode, of this house, being one of the Five Members of the
House of Commons demanded by Charles I. in 1641.

See Prince's Worthies, p. 563; Westcote's Pedigrees, p. 542; Lysons,
clv.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three conies sable_.

Present Representative, George Strode, Esq.




WALROND OF DULFORD IN THE PARISH OF BROAD HEMBURY.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of an ancient family seated
at Bradfield, in Uffculm, as early as the reign of Henry III, For
many years the Walronds, living at their venerable mansion of
Bradfield, were a powerful family in Devonshire. The male line of
this the principal branch has become extinct since the time of
Lysons, and the representation devolved on the present family,
descended from Colonel Humphry Walrond, a distinguished
Loyalist during the Civil Wars of the seventeenth century. On the
fall of the Royal Cause he emigrated to Barbadoes, of which island
with the aid of other Royalists he made himself Governor. Philip IV.
of Spain conferred upon him the title of Marques de Vallado, and
other Spanish honours, for, as the still existing patent states,
"services rendered to the Spanish Marine."

See Lysons, clviii. and 540; Westcote's Devonshire Pedigrees, p.
484.

ARMS.--_Argent, three bull's heads cabossed sable_.

Present Representative, Bethell Walrond, Esq.




BELLEW OF COURT, IN THE PARISH OF STOCKLEIGH-ENGLISH.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of the great Anglo-Irish
family of Bellew of Bar-meath, in the county of Meath, settled in
Devonshire in the reign of Edward IV., in consequence of a marriage
with one of the coheiresses of Fleming of Bratton-Fleming.

See the Visitations of Devon in 1564 and 1620: Lysons, cxxxiv. and
455.

ARMS.--_Sable, fretty or, a crescent for difference_.

Present Representative, John Prestwood Bellew, Esq.




DREWE OF GRANGE, IN THE PARISH OF BROAD HEMBURY.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Drogo or Dru, and is
supposed to be Norman. The first proved ancestor of the family
however is William Drewe, who married an heiress of Prideaux of
Orcheston in this county, and appears to have lived about the
beginning of the fourteenth century. His son was of Sharpham, also
in Devonshire. The present seat was erected by Sir Thomas Drewe in
1610.

Younger branches of this family were of Drew's Cliffe and High Hayne
in Newton St. Cyres.

See Lysons, cxliii. and 266; Westcote's Pedigrees, 582-3; and the
Topographer and Genealogist, ii. 209, for the Drews of Ireland,
descended from a second son of the house of Drew's Cliffe, who came
to Ireland, and settled at Meanus, in the county of Kerry, in 1633;
see also Prince's Worthies, 1st ed. p. 249.

ARMS.--_Ermine, a lion passant gules_.

Present Representative, Edward Simcoe Drewe, Esq.




BULLER OF DOWNES, IN THE PARISH OF CREDITON.

[Illustration] This is the head of the wide-spread family of Buller,
of which there are several branches in the Western counties. The
first recorded ancestor appears to be Ralph Buller, who in the
fourteenth century was seated at Woode, in the hundred of South
Petherton, and county of Somerset, by an heiress of Beauchamp. They
became possessed of Lillesdon, in the same county, and afterwards,
by an heiress of Trethurffe, we find them at Tregarrick, in
Cornwall, but were not till the eighteenth century of Downes, which
came from the coheiress of Gould.

Younger branches. Buller of Morval and of Lanreath, both in the
county of Cornwall. Buller of Lupton, in this county, Baronet 1790,
Baron Churston 1858.

See Lysons, cxxxvi.; Carew's Cornwall, ed. 1st, p. 133 b; and
Gilbert's Survey of Cornwall, ii. 38.

ARMS.--_Sable, on a plain cross argent, quarter pierced, four eagles
of the field_.

Present Representative, James Wentworth Buller, Esq.




HUYSHE OF SAND.


[Illustration] Originally of Doniford, in Somersetshire, where John
de Hywish is said to have been seated in the early part of the
thirteenth century. Sand, in the parish of Sidbury, came by purchase
to an ancestor of the family in the reign of Elizabeth; and,
although we find it in Lysons's List of the Decayed Mansions of the
County of Devon, it still remains the inheritance of this ancient
family.

See Lysons, cxlix. v. 144, and Burke's History of the Commoners, 1st
ed. vol. iv. p. 409.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend sable three lutes naiant of the first_.

Present Representative, the Rev. John Huyshe.




DORSETSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


BINGHAM OF BINGHAM'S MELCOMBE.


[Illustration] Sir John de Bingham, Knight, who lived in the reign
of Henry I., is the first recorded ancestor of this ancient family;
he was of Sutton, in the county of Somerset. Melcombe was inherited
from an heiress of Turberville in the time of Henry III., and has
been ever since the residence of the Binghams, of whom the most
remarkable was Sir Richard, a younger son of the head of the family
in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who greatly distinguished himself
in Ireland.

Younger branch. The Earls of Lucan in the Peerage of Ireland (1795)
descended from George, fourth son of Robert Bingham and Alice Coker,
and younger brother of Sir Richard.

See Hutchins's History of Dorset, vol. iv. 202; and Archdall's
Lodge's Peerage of Ireland, vii. 104.

ARMS.--_Azure, a bend cotised between six crosses patée or_.

Present Representative, Richard Hippisley Bingham, Esq.




RUSSELL OF KINGSTON-RUSSELL, DUKE OF BEDFORD 1694, EARL OF BEDFORD
1550.

[Illustration] Although this family may be said to have made their
fortune in the reign of Henry VII., first by Mr. John Russell's
accidental meeting with Philip Archduke of Austria, and his
consequent introduction to the King, and secondly by the large share
of ecclesiastical plunder acquired by this same John at the
Dissolution of the Monasteries, yet there is no reason to doubt that
the Russells are sprung from a younger branch of an ancient baronial
family, of whom the elder line were known by the name of Gorges, and
were Barons of Parliament in the time of Edward III.

The Russells were seated at Kingston as early as the reign of Henry
III.

See Wiffen's House of Russell, and Brydges's Collins, i. 266, &c.

ARMS.--_Argent, a lion rampant gules, on a chief sable three
escallops of the first_.

Present Representative, William Russell, 8th Duke of Bedford,
K.G.




DIGBY OF TILTON, BARON DIGBY OF SHERBORNE 1765, BARON DIGBY OF
GEASHILL IN IRELAND 1620.


[Illustration] An ancient Leicestershire family, to be traced nearly
to the Conquest, and supposed to be of Saxon origin. The name is
derived from Digby, in Lincolnshire; but Tilton, in the county of
Leicester, where AElmar, the first recorded ancestor of the Digbys,
held lands in 1086, also gave name to the earlier generations of the
family. These ancient possessions have long ceased to belong to the
Digbys; and by the will of the last Earl Digby, who died in 1856,
the manor of Coleshill, in Warwickshire, granted by Henry VII. to
Simon Digby, and the Castle of Sherborne, in Dorsetshire, have also
been alienated from the male line of the family.

There have been several branches of the Digbys both in England and
Ireland, besides the extinct Earls of Bristol. During the
seventeenth century the history of the family, as evinced in the
lives of the celebrated Sir Kenelm Digby and the Earl of Bristol, is
very remarkable.

See Leland's Itin., iv. fo. 19; Dugdale's Warwickshire, 2nd ed.,
vol. ii. 1012; and Pedigree of Digby of Tilton, Eye, Kettleby,
Sisonby, North Luffenham, and Welby, in Nichols's Leicestershire,
ii. pt. i. p. *261; for a more extended Pedigree see vol. iii. pt.
i. p. 473, under Tilton; Brydges's Collins, v. 348; Hutchins's
Dorset, iv. 133; and for an account of the famous Digby Pedigree,
compiled by order of Sir Kenelm in 1634, at the expense, it is said,
of £1200, see Pennant's Journey from Chester to London, 8vo.
1811, p. 441; and for portraits of the Digbys at Gothurst, ib. p.
449.

ARMS.--_Azure, a fleur-de-lis argent_.

Present Representative, Edward St. Vincent Digby, 9th Baron Digby of
Geashill.




+Gentle.+


FRAMPTON OF MORETON.


[Illustration] John de Frampton, M. P. for Dorset in 1373 and 1380,
is the first recorded ancestor; his son Walter, having married
Margaret heiress of the Manor of Moreton, became possessed of that
estate as early as the year 1365, which has since continued the seat
of the family.

See Hutchins's History of Dorset, vol. i. 238, where the pedigree is
given from the Heralds' Office, CC. 22, 155, continued from 1623 to
1753 by James Lane, Richmond Herald, and the new edition of
Hutchins, vol. i. p. 398.

ARMS.--_Argent, a bend pules cotised sable. Said to have been borne
by the first ancestor, John Frampton_.

Present Representative, Henry James Frampton, Esq.




BOND OF GRANGE AND LUTTON, IN THE PARISH OF STEPLE, IN THE ISLE OF
PURBECK.


[Illustration] Originally of Cornwall, and said to be a family of
great antiquity, but not connected with Dorset till the middle of
the fifteenth century. In 1431 (9th Henry VI.) Robert Bond of
Beauchamp's Hache, in the county of Somerset, was seated at Lutton,
his mother having been the heiress of that name and family. Grange
was purchased by Nathaniel Bond, Esq in 1686.

There were other branches of this family seated at Blackmanston,
Swanwick, and Wareham.

See Hutchins's History of Dorset, vol. i. 326, and the new edition,
vol. i. p. 602.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess or_. A former coat, recognised in the
Visitation of Dorset in 1623, was, _Argent, on a chevron sable three
besants_.

Present Representative, The Rev. Nathaniel Bond.




TREGONWELL OF ANDERSON AND CRANBORNE.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Tregonwell, in the parish of
Cranstock and county of Cornwall, and there the remote ancestors of
this family doubtless resided, though the pedigree is not _proved_
beyond the latter part of the fifteenth century. In the reign of
Henry VIII., Sir John Tregonwell was employed by the king on his
matrimonial affairs, and sent into France, Germany, and Italy.
His services were rewarded by grants of monastic lands, among
others by the mitred Abbey of Milton in this county. Milton was sold
to the Damers in the eighteenth century, and Anderson purchased in
1622.

See Gilbert's Cornwall, ii. 313; Hutchins's Dorset, iv. 210, and the
new edition, i. p. 161.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a fess cotised sable, between three Cornish
choughs proper three plates_.

Present Representative, John Tregonwell, Esq.




WELD OF LULWORTH CASTLE.

[Illustration] Founded by William Weld, Sheriff of London in 1352,
who married Anne Wettenhall; his posterity were seated at Eaton in
Cheshire, till the reign of Charles II. The present family are
descended from Sir Humphry, Lord Mayor of London in 1609, who was
fourth son of John Weld of Eaton and Joan Fitzhugh. Lulworth was
purchased in 1641.

Younger branch, Weld-Blundell of Ince-Blundell, Lancashire.

See Ormerod's Cheshire, ii. 131; Hutchins's Dorset, i. 226; and the
new edition, i. p. 372; Blakeway's Sheriffs of Salop, p. 120,

ARMS.--_Azure, a fess nebulée between three crescents ermine_.
Confirmed by Camden in 1606. See Morgan's Sphere of Gentry, book 2,
p. 112.

Present Representative, Edward Weld, Esq.




FLOYER OF WEST-STAFFORD.


[Illustration] This is a Devonshire family of good antiquity seated
at Floyers-Hayes, in the parish of St. Thomas in that county, soon
after the Norman Conquest. That estate appears to have remained in
the family till the latter part of the seventeenth century. The
Floyers afterwards removed into Dorsetshire, of which county Anthony
Floyer, Esq. was a justice of the peace in 1701.

See Prince's Worthies of Devonshire, ed. 1701, p. 308; Westcote's
Devonshire Pedigrees, p. 556.

ARMS.--_Sable, a chevron between three broad arrows argent_.

Present Representative, John Floyer, Esq. M. P. for Dorset.




DURHAM.




+Knightly.+


LUMLEY OF LUMLEY CASTLE, EARL OF SCARBOROUGH 1690, VISCOUNT LUMLEY
OF IRELAND 1628.


[Illustration] This very distinguished family is of Anglo-Saxon
descent, and has been seated in this county from the time of the
Conquest; Liulph, who lived before the year 1080, is the first
recorded ancestor. In the female line the Lumleys represent the
Barons Thweng of Kilton, and from hence the arms borne by this
ancient house, who were themselves summoned as Barons from the 8th
of Richard II. to the 1st of Henry IV. The elder line of the family
became extinct on the death of John Lord Lumley in 1609. It was
during the time of this Lord that the following anecdote is told.
"Oh, mon, gang na farther; let me digest the knowledge I ha' gained,
for I did na ken Adam's name was Lumley,"--exclaimed King James I.
when wearied with Bishop James's prolix account of the Lumley
Pedigree, on his Majesty's first visit to Lumley Castle in 1603. For
the curious story of the _lucky leap_ of Richard Lumley, the
immediate ancestor of the present family, see Nichols's
Leicestershire, iii. pt. i. 363; and Surtees's Durham, ii. 162.

See also Leland's Itin., vi. fol. 62; Brydges's Collins, iii. 693;
the Roll of Carlaverock by Sir H. Nicolas, p.313; and the Surrey
Archaeological collections, vol. iii. pp. 324-348, for a valuable
account of the Lumley monuments in Cheam church, and notes on the
pedigree and arms.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess gules between three popinjays proper,
collared of the second_. This coat was borne by Marmaduke de Twenge
in the reign of Henry III. and by M. de Thwenge and Monsieur Rauf
Lumleye in the reign of Edward III. and Richard II. (Rolls.) John le
Fitz Marmaduke bore, _Gules, a fess and three popinjays argent_.
(Roll of Carlaverock, 1300.) Sir Robert de Lumley the same, _but on
the fess three mullets sable_. (Roll of the reign of Edward II) See
the seal of John Lord Lumley, who died in 1421, in Bysshe's Notes on
Upton, p. 58.

Present Representative, Richard George Lumley, 9th Earl of
Scarborough.




SALVIN OF CROXDALE.


[Illustration] Sir Osbert Silvayne, Knight, of Norton Woodhouse, in
the Forest of Sherwood, living in the 29th of Henry III., is the
first proved ancestor of this family: he is said to have been son of
Ralph Silvayne. Some of the name, which we may supposed to be
derived from this wood or forest, were seated at Norton before the
year 1140. Croxdale was inherited from the heiress of Whalton in
1402.

Younger branch, Salvin of Sunderland Bridge, in this county.

See Surtees's Durham iv. 117, and the Scrope and Grosvenor Roll, ii.
p. 340. For the extinct family of Salvin of Newbiggen, see Graves's
Cleveland.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a chief sable two mullets pierced or_. This coat
was borne by Sir Gerard Salveyn in the reign of Edward II., and also
I suppose by the same Sir Gerard in that of Edward III., but here
the _mullets are voided vert_. Again, in the reign of Richard II,
Monsieur Gerard Salvayn bore his _mullets of six points or, pierced
gules_.

Present Representative, Gerard Salvin, Esq.




+Gentle.+


LAMBTON OF LAMBTON CASTLE, EARL OF DURHAM 1833, BARON 1828.


[Illustration] According to Surtees, traced to Robert de Lambton,
Lord of Lambton in 1314. 'There was, it is true, a John de Lambton,
living between 1180 and 1200, but the pedigree cannot be _proved_
beyond this Robert. The Lambtons were among the first families of
the North who embraced the Reformed Religion, and were loyal during
the Civil Wars of the seventeenth century.

See Surtees's Durham, ii. 174.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess between three lambs trippant argent_.

Present Representative, George Frederick D'Arcy Lambton, 2nd Earl of
Durham.




ESSEX.



+Knightly.+

TYRELL OF BOREHAM, BARONET 1809.


[Illustration] "This is," says Morant, "one of the most ancient
knightly families which has subsisted to our own days;" descended
from Walter Tyrell, who held the manor of Langham, in this county,
at the time of Domesday; it is doubtful whether he was the person
who shot William Rufus. Indeed, although the ancient descent of the
Terells or Tyrells is generally admitted, the pedigree appears to
require the attention of an experienced genealogist. There have been
many branches of the Tyrells in this and other counties; the present
is a junior one of the original stock, and Boreham a very recent
possession.

Elder branches now extinct:--

  Tyrell of Thornton, co. Buckingham, Baronet 1627 to 1749.
  Tyrell of Springfield, Essex, Baronet 1666 to 1766.

See Morant's History of Essex, i. 208; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 85,
iii. 610.

ARMS.--_Argent, two chevrons azure within a border engrailed gules_

Present Representative, Sir John Tyssen Tyrell, 2nd Baronet, late
M.P. for Essex.




WALDEGRAVE OF NAVERSTOKE, EARL WALDEGRAVE 1729; BARONET 1685,
BARONET 1643.

[Illustration] An ancient family, which has been seated in many
counties, originally of Waldegrave, in Northamptonshire; afterwards
settled in Suffolk; about the latter end of the fifteenth century,
seised of lands in this county; and again we find them in Norfolk
and Somersetshire. Naverstock was granted by Queen Mary in 1553, the
Waldegraves having suffered for their attachment to the old faith at
the time of the Reformation. Leland thus mentions the family; "As
far as I could gather of young Walgreve, of the Courte, the eldest
house of the Walgreves cummith owt of the Town of Northampton or
ther about, and there yet remaineth in Northamptonshire a man of
landes of that name."

See Leland's Itinerary, iv. fol. 19; Morant's Essex, i. 181;
Brydges's Collins, iv. 232; and the Scrope and Grosvenor Roll, ii.
p. 374, for an interesting memoir of Sir Richard Waldegrave, who
died in 1401, having been chosen Speaker of the House of Commons in
1381.

Younger branch, Baron Radstock, of Ireland, 1800, descended from the
younger brother of the fourth Earl Waldegrave.

ARMS.--_Per pale argent and gules_. This coat was borne by M.
Richard Waldeg've, as appears by the Roll of the reign of Richard
II.

Present Representative, William Frederick Waldegrave, 9th Earl
Waldegrave.




DISNEY OF THE HYDE, IN THE PARISH OF INGATSTONE.


[Illustration] A younger branch of an ancient Knightly Norman house,
settled for many years at Norton D'Isney in Lincolnshire, where the
principal line became extinct in 1722. The present family descend
from the eldest son by the second marriage of Sir Henry Disney of
Norton Disney, who died in 1641. See very elaborate pedigrees of
this family in the College of Arms, Norfolk 1, p. 38, and Norfolk 7,
p. 76; also Hutchins's Dorset, iv. p. 389, for Disney of Swinderby,
co. Lincoln, and of Corscomb, co. Dorset, and for the present
family.

See also the Topographer and Genealogist, iii. 393; and Leland's
Itinerary, i. p. 28, "Disney, alias De Iseney. He dwelleth at
Diseney, and of his name and line be Gentilmen yn Fraunce."

ARMS.--_Argent, on a fess gules three fleurs-de-lis or_. In the
reign of Richard II. Monsieur William Dysney bore, _Argent, three
lions passant in pale gules_. (Roll.)

Present Representative, Edgar Disney, Esq.




+Gentle+


GENT OF MOYNS.


[Illustration] The family of Gent was seated at Wymbish in this
county in 1328. William Gent, living in 1468, married Joan, daughter
and heir of William Moyne of Moyne or Moyns. His widow purchased
that manor in 1494, and it has since continued the seat of this
family, who were greatly advanced by Sir Thomas Gent, the Judge, in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

See Morant's History of Essex, ii. 353.

ARMS.--_Ermine, a chief indented sable_. Sometimes _a chevron sable_
is borne on the field. The Judge bore two spread eagles on the
chief, as appears by his seal.

Present Representative, George Gent, Esq.




VINCENT OF DEBDEN HALL, BARONET 1620.


[Illustration] The family of Vincent descend from Miles Vincent,
owner of lands at Swinford in the county of Leicester, in the tenth
of Edward II. Early in the fifteenth century the family removed to
Bernack, in the county of Northampton, on marriage with the heiress
of Sir John Bernack, of that place. Here they continued to reside,
until David Vincent, Esq. seventh in descent from that marriage,
settled at Long-Ditton, in Surrey, in the reign of Henry VIII. His
son, Sir Thomas Vincent, by marriage with the heiress of Lyfield,
removed to Stoke d'Abernon, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, which
was sold shortly after 1809, when the family removed to the present
seat in this county.

See Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p. 418; and Manning and Bray's
Surrey, vol. ii. p. 723.

ARMS.--_Azure, three quatrefoils urgent_.

Present Representative, Sir Francis Vincent, 10th Baronet.




GLOUCESTERSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


BERKELEY OF BERKELEY CASTLE, EARL OF BERKELEY 1679; BARON BERKELEY
1416.


[Illustration] Pre-eminent among the Norman aristocracy is the house
of Berkeley, and more especially remarkable from being the only
family in England in the male line retaining as their residence
their ancient Feudal Castle. This great family are descended from
Hardinge, who fought with William at the battle of Hastings; and
whose son, Robert Fitzhardinge, received the lordship and castle of
Berkeley from Henry II., in reward for his fidelity to the Empress
Maude and her son. His son and successor Maurice married Alice,
daughter of Roger de Berkeley, the former and dispossessed owner of
Berkeley.

Younger branches. The Berkeleys of Cotheridge and Spetchley, both in
Worcestershire, and both descended from Thomas, fourth son of James
fifth Lord Berkeley, and Isabel, daughter of Thomas Mowbray, Duke of
Norfolk. (Nash's Worcestershire, i. 258.)

For Berkeley of Stoke-Gifford in this county, and of Bruton, co.
Somerset, (Lords Berkeley of Stratton,) both extinct, see Blore's
Rutlandshire, p, 210; for Berkeley of Wymondham, also extinct, see
Nichols's Leicestershire, ii. pt. 1. p. 413; for Berkeley-Portman of
Bryanston, co. Dorset, see Hutchins's Dorset, i. 154.

For Berkeley Genealogy, see Leland's Itinerary, vi. fo. 49, &c.; for
Charters of the Berkeleys, with their seals copied from the
originals at Berkeley Castle, see MSS. Reg. Coll. Oxon. cxlix., and,
above all, Fosbroke's "Abstracts and Extracts of Smyth's Lives of
the Berkeleys," admirably illustrative of the ancient manners of our
old landed families.

ARMS.--_Gules, a chevron between ten crosses patée argent_. The
original arms were, _Gules, a chevron argent_, and were so borne by
Moris de Barkele, in the reign of Henry III. The present coat was
used by Sir Moris in the reigns of Edward II. and III. and Richard
II. His son, during his father's life, differenced his arms by _a
label azure_; Sir Thomas de Berkeley used "_rosettes_" instead of
crosses; Sir John de Berkeley, _Gules, a chevron argent between
three crosses patée or_. (Roll of Edw. II. &c.)

See for the differences in the Berkeley coat, Camden's Remains, ed.
1657, p. 226.

Present Representative, Thomas Morton Fitz-Hardinge Berkeley, 6th
Earl of Berkeley.




+Gentle.+


KINGSCOTE OF KINGSCOTE.


[Illustration] Ansgerus, or Arthur, owner of lands in Combe, in the
parish of Wotton under Edge, in this county, the gift of the Empress
Maude, is the patriarch of this venerable family. The manor of
Kingscote, which had been given by William I. to Roger de Berkeley,
was inherited from Aldeva, the daughter of Robert Fitz-Hardinge and
the wife of Nigel de Kingscote, soon after the reign of Henry II.

The Kingscotes shared in the glories of both Poictiers and
Agincourt, and, although a family of such long standing in
this county, appear never to have exceeded the moderate limits of
their present ancestral property.

See Atkyns's Gloucestershire, 2nd edit. 1768, p. 258; Rudder's
Gloucestershire, p. 512; and Fosbroke's Smyth's Lives of the
Berkeleys, p. 218.

ARMS.--_Argent, nine escallops sable, on a canton gules a mullet
pierced or_.

Present Representative, Thomas Henry Kingscote, Esq.




TRYE OF LECKHAMPTON-COURT.


[Illustration] This family is traced to Rawlin Try, in the reign of
Richard II. He married an heiress of Berkeley, by whom he had the
manor of Alkington in Berkeley. His great-grandson was High Sheriff
of Gloucestershire in 1447, and married an heiress of Boteler, from
whence came the manor of Hardwicke, sold to the Yorkes in the last
century. Leckhampton came from the Norwood family in recent times.

See Atkyns's Gloucestershire, p. 238; and Rudder, p. 471, &c.


ARMS.--_Or, a bend azure_. In the Roll of Arms of the Thirteenth
Century, printed by the Society of Antiquaries in 1864 [numbers 69
and 70], occur the following coats:

  "Signeur de Bilebatia de Try, d'or un bend gobony d'argent et
    d'azure.
  "Regnald de Try, d'or un bend d'azure un labell gulez."

Present Representative, Rev. Charles Brandon Trye.




ESTCOURT OF ESTCOURT, IN SHIPTON-MOYNE.


[Illustration] The printed accounts of this ancient family are
somewhat meagre, but original evidences in the possession of the
present Mr. Estcourt prove the long continuance of his ancestors as
lords of the manor of the place from whence the name is derived, and
of which John Estcourt died seised in the fourteenth year of Edward
IV. The estate has remained the inheritance of his descendants from
that period.

Walter de la Estcourt is the first recorded ancestor. He held lands
in Shipton in 1317, and died about 1325. See Atkyns's
Gloucestershire, 2nd ed. p. 340; Rudder, p. 654 and Lee's History of
the Parish of Tetbury, p. 196.

ARMS.--_Ermine, on a chief indented gules three estoiles or_, and so
borne by William Estcourt, Warden of New College, Oxford, in 1426,
as appears by his silver seal in the possession of Mr. Estcourt.

Present Representative, The Right Hon. Thomas H. S.
Sotheron-Estcourt, late M.P. for North Wilts.




LEIGH OF ADLESTROP, BARON LEIGH OF STONELEIGH 1839.


[Illustration] Descended from Agnes, daughter and heir of Richard de
Legh, and her second husband William Venables, the common ancestress
of the Leighs of West-Hall in High-Leigh. (See p. 22.) They had a
son who took the name of Legh, and settled at Booths in Cheshire:
from hence came the Leighs of Adlington, and from them the
Leighs of Lyme, both in Cheshire, and both now extinct. John Leigh,
Escheator of Cheshire in the 12th of Henry VI., was a younger son of
Sir Peter Leigh, of Lyme, and the ancestor of the Leighs of Ridge,
in the same county. Ridge was sold in the fourth of George II., and
the family (still I believe existing) removed into Kent.

The present family are descended from Sir Thomas Leigh, Knight, Lord
Mayor of London in 1558, who was also the ancestor of the extinct
house of Stoneleigh. Sir Thomas was great-grandson of Sir Peter
Leigh, Knight Banneret, who fell at Agincourt.

Younger Branches. Leigh of Middleton in Yorkshire, and Egginton in
Derbyshire. See also Townley of Townley.

Extinct Branches. Leigh of Rushall, in Staffordshire; see Shaw's
Staffordshire, ii. 69; of Brownsover, co. Warwick, Baronet; of
Baguly, co. Chester; of Annesley, co. Notts; of Birch, co.
Lancaster; of Stockwell, co. Surrey; and of Isall, co. Cumberland,
&c.

So various indeed are the ramifications of the different branches of
this wide-spreading family, that "as many Leighs as fleas" has grown
into a proverb in Cheshire.

See Ormerod's Cheshire, i. 350; iii. 333, 338, 374.

ARMS.--_Gules, a cross engrailed, and in the dexter point a fusil
argent_.

Present Representative, William Henry Leigh, 2nd Baron Leigh.




HEREFORDSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


BODENHAM OF ROTHERWAS.


[Illustration] Hugh de Bodenham, Lord of Bodenham, in this county,
grandfather of Roger who lived in the reign of Henry III., is the
ancestor of this family; who were afterwards of Monington and of
Rotherwas, about the middle of the fifteenth century.

See Blore's Rutlandshire for Bodenham of Ryhall, in that county, now
extinct, (p. 49,) and Duncomb's Herefordshire, i. 91, 104.

ARMS.--_Azure, a fess between three chess-rooks or_.

Present Representative, Charles De la Barre Bodenham, Esq.




SCUDAMORE OF KENTCHURCH.


[Illustration] This is the only remaining branch of an ancient
Norman family formerly seated at Upton and Norton near Warminster,
in Wiltshire; Walter de Scudamore being lord of the former manor in
the reign of Stephen. In that of Edward III. Thomas, younger son of
Sir Peter Scudamore, of Upton-Scudamore, having married the heiress
of Ewias, removed into Herefordshire, and was the ancestor of the
family long seated at Holme-Lacy, created Viscounts Scudamore in
1628, and extinct in 1716. From him also descended the house of
Kentchurch, who are said to have been seated there in the reign of
Edward IV.

See Gibson's Views of the Churches of Door, Holme-Lacy, and Hemsted,
&c. 4to. 1727; and Guillim's Heraldry, ed. 1724, p. 549.

ARMS.--_Gules, three stirrups, leathered and buckled, or_. Ancient
coat, _Or, a cross patée fitchée gules_.

Present Representative, John Lucy Scudamore, Esq.




+Gentle.+


LUTTLEY OF BROCKHAMPTON (CALLED BARNEBY).


[Illustration] Luttley is in the parish of Enfield, in the county of
Stafford, and Philip de Luttley was lord thereof in the 20th of
Edward I. He was the ancestor of a family the direct line of which
terminated in an heiress in the reign of Henry VI. But Adam de
Luttley, younger brother of Philip above-named, was grandfather of
Sir William Luttley, Knight, of Munslow Hall, co. Salop, whose
lineal descendant, John Luttley, Esq. was of Bromcroft Castle, in
the same county, 1623. Philip Luttley, Esq. of Lawton Hall, co.
Salop, great-grandson of John last-named, married Penelope, only
daughter of Richard Barneby, Esq. of Brockhampton; and their son,
Bartholomew, succeeding to the Barneby estates, assumed that name;
and was grandfather of the late John Barneby, Esq. M. P. for the
county of Worcester.

From the MSS. of Mr. Joseph Morris of Shrewsbury.

ARMS.--_Quarterly or and azure, four lions rampant counterchanged_.

Present Representative, John Habington Barneby, Esq.




BERINGTON OF WINSLEY.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Berington, in the hundred of
Condover, and county of Salop, where Thomas and Roger de Berington
were living in the reigns of Edward I. and II. Another Thomas,
living in the time of Edward III., married Alice, daughter of Sir
John Draycot, Knight, and was ancestor of John Berington, of
Stoke-Lacy, in this county, who, about the reign of Henry VII.
married Eleanor, daughter and heir of Rowland Winsley, of Winsley,
Esq. From this marriage the present Mr. Berington is tenth in
descent.


From Roger de Berington, brother of Thomas first-named, the
Beringtons of Shrewsbury and of Moat Hall, co. Salop, traced their
descent. Thomas Berington, of Moat Hall, Esq. who died in 1719,
married Anne, daughter of John Berington, of Winsley, Esq.; and the
last heir male of their descendants, Philip Berington, Esq. dying
s.p. in 1803, devised his Shropshire estates to his kinsman, Mr.
Berington, of Winsley.

From the MSS. of Mr. Joseph Morris, of Shrewsbury, and Eyton's
Shropshire, vi. p. 42.

ARMS.--_Sable, three greyhounds courant in pale argent, collared
gules, within a border of the last_.

Present Representative, John Berington, Esq.




HERTFORDSHIRE.



+Knightly.+


JOCELYN, OF HYDE HALL, IN THE PARISH OF SABRIDGEWORTH, EARL OF RODEN
IN IRELAND 1771; IRISH BARON 1743; BARONET 1665.


[Illustration] A family of Norman origin, said to have come into
England with William the Conqueror, and to have been seated at
Sempringham, in the county of Lincoln, by the grant of that monarch.
In 1249 Thomas Jocelyn, son of John, having married Maud, daughter
and coheir of Sir John Hyde, of Hyde, brought that manor and
lordship into this family, in which it has ever since continued. The
peerage was originally conferred on Robert Jocelyn, Lord Chancellor
of Ireland in 1739, created Baron Newport 1743, whose son, the first
Earl, married the heiress of the Hamiltons, Earls of Clanbrassil, in
1752.

See "Historical Anecdotes of the Families of the Boleyns, Careys,
Mordaunts, Hamiltons, and Jocelyns, arranged as an Elucidation of
the Genealogical Chart at Tollymore Park," Newry, 1839, privately
printed. See also Archdall's Lodge's Peerage of Ireland, iii. 258,
and Chauncy's Hertfordshire, 1st ed. p. 182.

ARMS.--_Azure, a circular wreath argent and sable, with four hawk's
bells joined thereto in quadrature or_.

Present Representative, Robert Jocelyn, third Earl of Roden,
K.P.




WOLRYCHE OF CROXLEY.


[Illustration] This is a very ancient Shropshire family, descended
from Sir Adam Wolryche, Knight, of Wenlock, living in the reign of
Henry III., and who, previous to being knighted, was admitted of the
Roll of Guild Merchants of the town of Shrewsbury in 1231, by the
old Saxon name of "Adam Wulfric." His descendant Andrew Wolryche was
M. P. for Bridgnorth in 1435, being then of Dudmaston, where the
elder branch of this family was seated for a considerable period,
created Baronets in 1641, extinct in 1723. The present family
descend from Edward, third son of Humphry Wolryche, Esq. grandson of
Andrew Wolryche, which Humphry is recorded as one of the "Gentlemen"
of Shropshire, in the seventeenth of Henry VII., 1501. There were
branches of the family, now extinct, at Cowling and Wickhambroke,
Suffolk, and Alconbury, Huntingdonshire.

From the MSS. of Mr. Joseph Morris, of Shrewsbury.

ARMS.--_Azure, a chevron between three swans argent_.

Present Representative, Humphry William Wolryche, Esq.




HUNTINGDONSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


SHERARD OF GLATTON, BARON SHERARD IN IRELAND 1627.


[Illustration] The pedigree of this family does not appear to be
_proved_ beyond William Sherard, who died in 1304. His ancestors,
however, are said to have been of Thornton, in Cheshire, in the
thirteenth century. In 1402 the family were established at
Stapleford in Leicestershire by marriage with the heiress of
Hawberk.

On the decease of Robert Sherard, sixth Earl of Harborough, in 1859,
the representation of the family devolved upon the present lord,
descended from George, third son of the first Baron.

See Nichols's Leicestershire, vol. ii. pt. i. 343; and Brydges's
Collins, iv. 180,

An extinct younger branch was of Lopthorne, in the county of
Leicester.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron gules between three torteauxes_.

Present Representative, Philip Castell Sherard, 9th Baron
Sherard.




KENT


+Knightly.+


DERING OF SURENDEN-DERING, BARONET 1626.


[Illustration] The family of Dering descend from Norman de Morinis,
whose ancestor, Vitalis FitzOsbert, lived in the reign of Henry II.
Norman de Morinis married the daughter of Deringus, descended from
Norman Fitz-Dering, Sheriff of this county in King Stephen's reign.
Richard Dering died seised of Surenden, which came from the heiress
of Haute, in 1480. The loyalty of Sir Edward Dering in the Civil
Wars, in Charles I.'s time, deserves to be remembered: see his
character in Peck's Desiderata Curiosa, II. B. 14, 19, 20, and the
interesting memoir of him by John Bruce, Esq. F.S.A. in "Proceedings
in the County of Kent," printed for the Camden Society 1861.

For a notice of the old seats of this family, in the parish of Lidd,
called Dengemarsh Place and Westbrooke, see Hasted's History of
Kent, iii. 515, and for the family, iii. 228; and Wotton's
Baronetage, ii. 13,

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess azure, in chief three torteauxes_, borne by
"Richard fil' Deringi de Haut," in 19 Hen. IV. as appears by his
seal. The same coat is on the roof of the cloisters of Canterbury
Cathedral. The son of this Sir Richard Dering bore, _Or, a saltier
sable_, the ancient arms of De Morinis, and now generally quartered
with Dering. See Willement's Heraldic Notices of Canterbury
Cathedral, pp. 90, 106.

Present Representative, Sir Edward C. Dering, 8th Baronet, M.P. for
East Kent.




NEVILLE OF BIRLING, EARL OF ABERGAVENNY 1784; BARON 1392.


[Illustration] "In point of antiquity, and former feudal power,
probably the most illustrious house in the peerage," says Brydges.
Descended from Gospatric, the Saxon Earl of Northumberland, whose
great-grandson, marrying the heiress of Neville, gave that name to
his posterity, for many ages the Nevilles were Barons of Raby and
Earls of Westmerland. The last Earl was attainted in the 13th of
Elizabeth. A younger branch of the Nevilles, in the person of Sir
Edward Neville, obtained the castle and barony of Abergavenny, and
the estate of Birling, with the heiress of Beauchamp, in the reign
of Henry VI.; and the present family is descended from this match,
having been Barons of Abergavenny previously to the creation of the
Earldom. Birling was long deserted by the family, whose principal
seat was afterwards at Sheffield, and Eridge, in Sussex; but it is
now the residence of Lord Abergavenny.

See Hasted, ii. 200; Brydges's Collins, v. 151; and Surtees's
Durham, iv. 158, for pedigrees of the Nevilles, Earls of
Westmerland, and the Nevilles of Weardale and Thornton-Bridge. See
also Rowland's "Account of the Noble Family of Neville," privately
printed 1830, folio; Surtees's "Sketch of the Stock of Nevill," 8vo.
1843.

ARMS.--_Gules, a saltier argent, thereon a rose of the first, seeded
proper_.

This coat, without the rose, was borne by Robert de Neville in the
reign of Henry III. In the reign of Edward III. M. de Neville de
Hornby bore the coat reversed, _Argent, a saltier gules_. M.
Alexander de Neville, at the same period, differenced it by _a
martlet sable_. M. William Neville and N. Thomas Neville bore
for difference respectively, _a fleur-de-lis azure and a martlet
gules_, in the reign of Richard II. (Rolls.) The Rose is allusive to
the House of Lancaster, Ralph Neville, 1st Earl of Westmerland,
having married to his second wife Joan, daughter of John of Gaunt,
Duke of Lancaster. The older coat was, _Or, fretty gules, on a
canton sable an ancient ship_.

Present Representative, the Rev. William Neville, 4th Earl of
Abergavenny.




+Gentle.+


HONYWOOD OF EVINGTON, IN ELMSTED, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Henewood, near Postling, in
this county, where the ancestors of this family resided as early as
the reign of Henry III. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries
the Honywoods removed to Hythe, which they often represented in
Parliament, and afterwards to Sene, in Newington, near Hythe.
Caseborne, in Cheriton, came from an heiress of that name before the
time of Henry VI.; Evington, by purchase, in the reign of Henry VII.

Younger branches were of Marks Hall, in Essex, and of Petts, in
Charing, in this county. Of the former family was Robert Honywood,
whose wife Mary, daughter of Robert Atwaters, or Waters, lived to
see 367 descendants: she died in 1620, aged 93.

See Topographer and Genealogist, i. 397, 568; ii. 169, 189, 256,
312, 433; Hasted's Kent, ii. 442, 449; iii. 308; Wotton's
Baronetage, iii. 105.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three hawk's heads erased azure_.
These arms, of the time of Richard II. are carved on the cloisters
of Canterbury Cathedral. See Willement, p. 101.

Present Representative, Sir Courtenay John Honywood, 7th Baronet.




TWYSDEN OF ROYDON-HALL, IN EAST PECKHAM, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] Twysden, in the parish of Goudhurst, appears to have
given name to this family: it was possessed by Adam de Twysden in
the reign of Edward I.; and in that of Henry IV. Roger Twysden, his
descendant, married the daughter and heir of Thomas Chelmington of
Chelmington, in Great Chart, Esq. where his son Roger removed.
Twysden was sold in the reign of Henry VI. In the reign of
Elizabeth, William Twysden, of Chelmington, married Elizabeth,
daughter of Thomas Roydon, of Roydon-Hall, which has since been the
residence of his descendants. There is another Twysden, in the
parish of Sandhurst, in this county, where the family are also said
to have lived in the time of Edward I.

A younger branch of Bradbourne, in this county, also Baronets, were
extinct in 1841.

See Hasted's Kent, ii. 213, 275; iii. 37, 244; Philpot's Kent, p.
300; Wotton's Baronetage, i. 211.

ARMS.--_Gyronny of four, argent and gules, a saltier between four
crosses crosslet, all counterchanged_.

Present Representative, Sir William Twysden, 8th Baronet.




TOKE, OF GODINGTON.


[Illustration] This family claim descent from Robert de Toke, who
was present with Henry III. at the Battle of Northampton. In the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the Tokes were seated at Bere, in
the parish of Westcliffe, in this county: this line became extinct
at the latter end of the seventeenth century.

The Tokes of Godington are a junior branch, descended from the
heiress of Goldwell, of Godington, about the reign of Henry VI.

See Hasted's Kent, iii. 247; Visitations of Kent, 1574 and 1619; and
Harleian MSS. 1195. 55, 1196. 108.

ARMS.--_Party per chevron sable and argent, three gryphon's heads
erased and counterchanged_. John Toke, of Godington, had an
additional coat, an augmentation granted to him by Henry VII., as a
reward for his expedition in a message on which he was employed to
the French King: viz. _Argent, on a chevron between three
greyhound's heads erased sable, collared or, three plates_.

Present Representative, the Rev. Nicholas Toke.




ROPER OF LINSTEAD, BARON TEYNHAM 1616.


[Illustration] William Roper, or Rosper, who lived in the reign of
Henry III, is the first recorded ancestor; his descendants were of
St. Dunstan's, near Canterbury, in the reigns of Edward III. and
Richard II. Edmund Roper was one of the Justices of the Peace for
this county in the time of Henry IV. and V.

The elder line of this family were seated at West-Hall, in Eltham,
and also at St. Dunstan's, and became extinct in 1725. The younger
and present branch at Linstead, which came from the heiress of
Fineux, in the reign of Henry VIII. King James I. conferred the
peerage on Sir John Roper in 1616.

For the origin of the family, see Dugdale's Warwickshire, 2nd ed. p.
316; Hasted's Kent, i. 55; ii. 687; iii. 589; and Brydges's Collins,
vii. 77.

ARMS.--_Per fess azure and or, a pale counterchanged, three buck's
heads erased of the second_.

Present Representative, George Henry Roper Curzon, 16th Baron
Teynham.




KNATCHBULL OF MERSHAM-HATCH, BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] Hasted gives no detailed pedigree of this family
before the purchase of the manor and estate of Hatch, by Richard
Knatchbull, in the reign of Henry VII. It appears however that the
first recorded ancestor, John Knatchbull, held lands in the parish
of Limne, in this county, in the reign of Edward III., where some of
the name remained in that of Charles I. There are pedigrees in the
Visitations of Kent of 1574 and 1619.

See Philpot's Kent, p.199; Hasted's Kent, iii. 286; and Wotton's
Baronetage, ii. 228.

ARMS.--_Azure, three cross-crosslets fitchée in bend or, cotised of
the same_.

Present Representative, Sir Norton Joseph Knatchbull, 10th
Baronet.




FILMER OF EAST-SUTTON, BARONET 1674.


[Illustration] The Filmers were anciently seated at the manor of
Herst, in the parish of Otterden, in this county, in the reign of
Edward II., and there remained till the time of Elizabeth, when
Robert Filmer, son of James, removed to Little-Charleton, in
East-Sutton: the manor was purchased by his elder son. There are
pedigrees of Filmer in the Kentish Visitations of 1574 and 1619. The
Baronetcy was conferred by Charles II., as a reward for the loyal
exertions of Sir Robert Filmer during the Usurpation.

See Hasted's Kent, ii. 410; Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 581.
ARMS.--_Sable three bars, and in chief three cinquefoils or_.

Present Representative, Sir Edmund Filmer, 9th Baronet, late M.P.
for West Kent.




OXENDEN OF DENE, BARONET 1678.


[Illustration] Solomon Oxenden, who lived in the reign of Edward
III., is the first known ancestor. Dene, in the parish of Wingham,
was purchased at the latter part of the reign of Henry VI. The
family had previously been stated at Brook, in the same parish.
Thomas Oxenden died seised of Dene in 1492. There is a pedigree in
the Visitation of Kent in 1619.

See Hasted's Kent, iii. 696; Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 638.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron gules between three oxen sable_. Confirmed
in the 24th of Henry VI.

Present Representative, Sir Henry Chudleigh Oxenden, 8th Baronet.




FINCH OF EASTWELL, EARL OF WINCHILSEA AND NOTTINGHAM 1628-1681.


[Illustration] "The name of the Finches," writes Leland, "hath bene
of ancient tyme in estimation in Southsex about Winchelesey, and by
all likelyhod rose by sum notable merchaunte of Winchelesey." The
name is said to be derived from the manor of Finches in the parish
of Kidd.

Vincent Herbert, alias Finch, married Joan, daughter and heir of
Robert de Pitlesden, of Tenderden. His son was of Netherfield,
in Sussex, in the reign of Richard II. and Henry IV.; and was the
ancestor of this family, who were of the Moat, near Canterbury, by
marriage with the heiress of Belknap before 1493. Eastwell came by
the coheiress of Moyle about the reign of Elizabeth.

The heiress of Heneage, who married Sir Moyle Finch, was created
Countess of Winchilsea in 1628. The Earldom of Nottingham is due to
the law, being granted in 1681 to Heneage, grandson of the first
Countess.

Younger Branch. Earl of Aylesford 1714.

From John, second son of the second Vincent Finch, of Netherfield,
were descended the Finches of Sewards, Norton, Kingsdown, Feversham,
Wye, and other places in this county.

See Leland's Itinerary, vi. fol. 59; Basted's Kent. iii. 198; and
Brydges's Collins, iii. 371.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three gryphons sable_.

Present Representative, George James Finch Hatton, 10th Earl of
Winchilsea, and 7th Earl of Nottingham.




LANCASHIRE.


+Knightly.+


PENNINGTON OF PENNINGTON, BARON MUNCASTER IN IRELAND 1676.


[Illustration] Gamel de Pennington, ancestor of this ancient family,
was seated at Pennington at the period of the Conquest. But, as
early as the reign of Henry II., Muncaster, in Cumberland, belonged
to the Penningtons, and afterwards became their residence; and here
King Henry VI. was concealed by Sir John Pennington in his flight
from his enemies. There is a tradition that, on quitting Muncaster,
the king presented his host with a small glass vessel, still
possessed by the family, and called "THE LUCK OF MUNCASTER:" to the
preservation of which a considerable degree of superstition was
attached.

See Baines's History of the County of Lancaster, iv. 669; Lysons's
Cumberland, 139; Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 602.

ARMS.--_Or, five fusils in fess azure_.

Present Representative, Josslyn Francis Pennington, 5th Baron
Muncaster.




MOLYNEUX OF SEFTON, EARL OF SEFTON IN IRELAND 1771 VISCOUNT MOLYNEUX
IN IRELAND 1628; BARON SEFTON 1831; BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] An ancient Norman family, who have been possessed of
the manor of Sefton, in this county, from the period of the
Conquest, or very soon afterwards: it was held as a knight's fee, as
of the Castle of Lancaster.

William de Molines is the first recorded ancestor, and from him the
pedigree is very regularly deduced to the present day. This truly
noble family have been greatly distinguished in the field, witness
Agincourt and Flodden. Thrice has the honour of the banner been
conferred on a Molyneux. The second occasion was in Spain in 1367,
from the hands of the Black Prince himself. In the seventeenth
century, the family proved themselves right loyal to the crown, and
suffered accordingly.

Sir Archdall's Lodge's Peerage of Ireland, iii. 239; Brydges's
Biographical Peerage, iv. 93; and Baines's Lancashire, iv. 276.

Younger Branch. Molyneux, of Castle Dillon, co. Armagh, Baronet
1730, descended from Thomas Molyneux, born at Calais in 1531, for
whom see "An Account of the Family and Descendants of Sir Thomas
Molyneux, Knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer in Ireland to Queen
Elizabeth." Evesham, sm. 4to. 1820.

For Molyneux of Teversal, co. Notts, Baronet 1611, extinct 1812,
descended from the second son of Sir Richard Molyneux, the hero of
Agincourt, see Thoroton's Nottinghamshire, p. 269; and Wotton's
Baronetage, i. 141.

ARMS.--_Azure, a cross moline or_. The Irish branch bears a
_fleur-de-lis or_ in the dexter quarter.

Present Representative, William Philip Molyneux, 4th Earl of Sefton.




HOGHTON OF HOGHTON-TOWER, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] Hocton, or Hoghton, appears to have been granted in
marriage by Warin Bussel to one Hamon, called "Pincerna," whose
grandson was the first "Adam de Hocton," who held one carucate of
land in Hocton in the reign of Henry II. His grandson, Sir Adam de
Hoghton, lived in the 50th of Henry III., and was the ancestor of
this family.

See Baines's Lancashire, iii. 348 and 459, for an interesting
account of Hoghton-Tower, long deserted by the family; and Wotton's
Baronetage, i. 15.

ARMS.--_Sable, three bars argent_: borne in the reign of Richard II.
by Mons. Ric. de Hoghton. His son (?) Richard, the same, _with a
label of three points gules_. (Rolls.)

Present Representative, Sir Henry Hoghton, 9th Baronet.




CLIFTON OF CLIFTON.


[Illustration] Clifton is in the parish of Kirkham, and here William
de Clifton held ten carucates of land in the 42nd year of Henry
III., and was Collector of Aids for this county. His son Gilbert,
Lord of Clifton, died in the seventeenth of Edward II. On the death
of Cuthbert Clifton, in 1512, the manor was temporarily alienated
from the male line by an heiress; but by a match with the coheiress
of Halsall, before 1657, it again became the property of the then
principal branch of this ancient family, who were originally a
junior line descended from the Cliftons of Westby.

See Baines's Lancashire, iv. 404.

ARMS.--_Sable, on a bend argent three mullets pierced gules_: borne
in the reigns of Edward III. and Richard II. by Mons. Robert de
Clyfton. (Rolls.)

Present Representative, John Talbot Clifton, Esq.




TRAFFORD OF TRAFFORD, BARONET 1841.


[Illustration] Trafford is in the parish of Eccles, and here the
ancestors of this family are said to have been established even
before the Norman Conquest. The pedigree given in Baines's
Lancashire professes to be founded on documents in possession of the
family, but some of it is certainly inaccurate, and cannot be
depended on: Ralph de Trafford, who is said to have died about 1050,
is the first recorded ancestor, but this is before the general
assumption of surnames, which, as Camden observes, are first found
in the Domesday Survey. On the whole, it may be assumed that the
antiquity of the family is exaggerated, though the name no doubt is
derived from this locality at an early period.

See Baines's Lancashire, iii. 110.

ARMS.--_Argent, a gryphon segreant gules_. See in "Hearne's Curious
Discourses," i. 262. edit. 1771, for the supposed origin of the
Trafford Crest, "a man thrashing," which was however only granted
about the middle of the 16th century.

Present Representative, Sir Humphry Trafford, 2nd Baronet.




HESKETH OF RUFFORD, BARONET 1761


[Illustration] In the year 1275, the 4th of Edward I., Sir William
Heskayte, Knight, married the coheiress of Fytton, and thus became
possessed of Rufford, which has since remained the inheritance of
this ancient family.

Younger branch. Hesketh of Gwyrch Castle, Denbighshire, descended
from the Heskeths of Rossel, Lancashire, who were a younger branch
of the house of Rufford.

See Baines's Lancashire, iii. 426.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend sable three garbs or_, the ancient coat of
Fytton. Hesketh of Gwyrch Castle bears, _Or, on a bend sable between
two torteauxes three garbs of the field_.

Present Representative, Sir Thomas George Hesketh, 5th Baronet.




TOWNLEY OF TOWNLEY.


[Illustration] "This is not one of those long lines which are
memorable only for their antiquity," says Whitaker, in his account
of several remarkable members of this eminent family; who are
descended from John del Legh, who died about the 4th of Edward III.,
and the great heiress Cecilia, daughter of Richard de Townley, whose
family was of Saxon origin, and traced to the reign of Alfred. There
is preserved at Townley, of which beautiful place Whitaker gives a
charming account, an unbroken series of portraits from John Townley,
Esq. in the reign of Elizabeth to the present time.

See Leland's Itinerary, i. 96 and v. 102; Whitaker's Whalley, 271,
341, 484; and for the extinct branches of Hurstwood Hall,
[1562-1794,] p. 384; and of Barnside [Edw. IV.--1739,] p. 395.

For the origin of the Legh (properly Venables) family of Cheshire,
see Leigh of Adlestrop, p. 92.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess and in chief three mullets sable_.

Present Representative, Charles Townley, Esq.




GERARD OF BRYAN, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] This family claims the same ancestor as the now
extinct house of the Windsors Earls of Plymouth; the Carews also,
both of England and Ireland, are descended, according to Camden,
from the same progenitors: the pedigree therefore is extended to the
Conquest, Otherus or Otho being the first recorded ancestor. The
Lancashire branch were not settled there till the reign of Edward
III., when they became possessed of Bryn, by marriage with the
heiress of that name and place, From the Gerards of Ince descended
the extinct Lords Gerard, of Gerard's-Bromley, and Sir William
Gerard, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, who died in 1581.

See Baines's Lancashire, iii. 641; and Wotton's Baronetage, i. 51.

ARMS.--_Argent, a saltire gules_.

Present Representative, Sir Robert Tolver Gerard, 13th Baronet.




STANLEY OF KNOWESLEY, EARL OF DERBY 1485; BARONET 1627.


[Illustration] Although Sir Rowland Stanley Errington, brother of
Sir William Massey Stanley, late of Hooton, in the county of
Chester, Baronet, is in fact the head of this illustrious house,
yet, as that estate has been sold, and his family have now no
connection with Cheshire, the Earl of Derby must be considered the
_chief_, as he is in truth the _principal_, branch of the house of
Stanley.

As few families have acted a more prominent part in History, so few
can trace a more satisfactory pedigree. Descended from a younger
branch of the Barons Audeley, of Audeley in Staffordshire, the name
of Stanley, from the manor of that name in this county, in the reign
of John, was assumed by William de Audleigh. Sir John Stanley, K.G.,
Lord Deputy of Ireland, in 1381 married the heiress of Lathom, and
thus became possessed of Knowesley; it was this Sir John also who
obtained a grant of the Isle of Man, which afterwards descended to
the Murrays Dukes of Athol till 1765. The principal branch of this
family became extinct on the death of James, tenth Earl, in 1736;
when the earldom descended on Sir Edward Stanley of Bickerstaff,
Baronet, descended from Sir James Stanley, brother of Thomas second
Earl of Derby.

For Stanley of Hooton, see Ormerod's Cheshire, ii. 230. The famous,
or rather infamous, Sir William Stanley was of this line.

Younger Branches. Stanley of Cross-Hall, descended from Peter second
son of Sir Thomas Stanley, 2nd Baronet, who died in 1653; and the
family of the late Rev. James Stanley of Ormskirk, descended
from Henry 2nd son of Sir Edward Stanley 1st. Bart. who died in
1640.

Stanley of Alderley, Cheshire, Baron Stanley of Alderley 1839,
descended from Sir John Stanley and the heiress of Wever of
Alderley. See Ormerod, iii. 306.

Stanley of Dalegarth, Cumberland, descended from John, second son of
John Stanley, Esq., younger brother of Sir William Stanley, and the
heiress of Bamville.

See Brydges's Collins, iii. 50; Seacome's House of Stanley, 4to.
1741; for Stanley Legend, &c. Coll. Topog. et Genealog. vii. 1.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend azure three buck's heads cabossed and
attired or_, assumed on the match with the heiress of Bamville,
instead of the coat of Audeley.*

Present Representative, Edward Geoffery Smith Stanley, 14th Earl of
Derby, K.G.

  * The Dalegarth family bear the _bend cotised vert_.




ASSHETON OF DOWNHAM.


[Illustration] This is the only remaining branch of the old
Lancashire family of Assheton, originally seated at
Assheton-under-Lyne, and of whom the Asshetons of Middleton and of
Great Lever, both Baronets, represented the elder lines. The present
family descend from Radcliffe Assheton, second son of Ralph
Assheton, of Great Lever, born in 1582.

Downham appears to have come into the family in the seventeenth
century.

See Whitaker's Whalley, p. 299 and p. 300, for the curious journal
of Nicholas Assheton, of Downham, Esq. 1617-18, since published
entire as vol. xiv. of the series of the Chetham Society, 1848. For
Assheton of Ashton-under-Lyne, Baines's Lancashire, ii. 532, and
Collectanea Topog. et Genealog. vii. 12; for Ashton of Lever and
Whalley, Baines, iii. 190.

ARMS.--_Argent, a mullet pierced sable_.

Present Representative, Ralph Assheton, Esq.




RADCLYFFE OF FOXDENTON.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of the well-known Lancashire
family of this name, who trace their descent from Richard of
Radclyffe Tower, near Bury, in the reign of Edward I. Ordshall, also
in this county, was for many ages the seat of the ancestors of the
present family, who are descended from Robert, sixth and youngest
son of Sir Alexander Radclyffe, of Ordshall, who was born in 1650.
Foxdenton, which as early as the fifteenth century belonged to one
branch of the Radclyffes, was bequeathed to the present family early
in the last century. The extinct house of the Radclyffes, Barons
Fitzwalter and Earls of Sussex 1529, were sprung from William, elder
brother of the first Sir John Radclyffe, of Ordshall. The Radclyffes
of Dilston, Baronets 1619, and Earls of Derwentwater 1687, were
perhaps also of the same origin, but this has not been
ascertained.

See Burke's Landed Gentry, 2nd. ed. vol. ii. p. 1091, and Ellis's
Family of Radclyffe, for the House of Dilston (1850).

ARMS.--_Argent, two bends engrailed sable, a label of three points
gules_. The more simple coat of _Argent, a bend engrailed sable_,
was borne by the Earls of Sussex, and also by the Earls of
Derwentwater.

Present Representative, Robert. Radclyffe, Esq.




+Gentle.+


HULTON OF HULTON.


[Illustration] Hulton is in the parish of Dean, and gave name to
Bleythen, called de Hulton, in the reign of Henry II., and from him
this ancient family, still seated at their ancestral and original
manor, is regularly descended.

See Baines's Lancashire, iii. p. 40.

ARMS.--_Argent, a lion rampant gules_.

Present Representative, William Hulton, Esq.




ECCLESTON OF SCARISBRICK (CALLED SCARISBRICK).


[Illustration] Descended from Robert Eccleston of Eccleston, living
in the reign of Henry III., an estate which continued in the family
until the last generation, when it was sold, and that of
Scarisbrick, with the name, acquired by marriage about the same
period.

See Baines, iii. 480; and for Scarisbrick, iv. 258.

In Flower's Visitation of this county, in 1567, is a pedigree of
Eccleston.

ARMS.--_Argent, a cross sable, in the first quarter a fleur-de-lis
gules_.

Present Representative, Charles Scarisbrick, Esq.




ORMEROD OF TYLDESLEY.


[Illustration] There is a good pedigree of this, his own family, in
Ormerod's History of Cheshire, (ii. p. 204,) under Chorlton, a seat
of the family purchased in 1811. The first recorded ancestor is
Matthew de Hormerodes, living about 1270. The elder line of his
descendants, whose name was derived from Ormerod in Whalley, became
extinct in 1793. The present family trace their lineage from George
Ormerod, fourth son of Peter Ormerod, of Ormerod, who died in 1653.

See also Whitaker's Whalley, p. 364.

ARMS.--_Or, three bars, and in chief a lion passant gules_.

Present Representative, George Ormerod, Esq.




STARKIE OF HUNTROYD.


[Illustration] The pedigree begins with Geoffry Starky, of
Barthington (Barnton) in Cheshire, supposed to be the same with
Geoffry, son of Richard Starkie, of Stretton, in the same county, an
ancient family which can be traced almost to the Conquest. William
Starkie was of Barnton in the seventh of Edward IV. Huntroyd was
acquired by marriage, in 1464, with the heiress of Symondstone.

See Whitaker's Whalley, 266, 529; also Ormerod's Cheshire, i. 474;
and Baines, iii. 309.

Younger branches. Starkie of Twiston, and Starkie of Thornton,
Yorkshire.

ARMS.--_Argent, a bend between six storks sable_.

Present Representative, Le Gendre Starkie, Esq.




CHADWICK OF HEALEY.


[Illustration] A younger branch of Chadwick of Chadwick, now
extinct, a family which can be traced to the reign of Edward III.

Healey came from the coheiress of Okeden in 1483. Mavesyn Ridware,
in Staffordshire, is also the property of this family, derived by an
heiress from the Cawardens, and ultimately from the Malvesyns, who
came in with the Conqueror.

Younger branch. Chadwick of Swinton, in this county, derived from
the heiress of Strettell: they bear their arms differenced by a
_border engrailed or, charged with cross crosslets_.

See Shaw's Staffordshire, i. p. 166, for a curious account of the
Malvesyns, Cawardens, and Chadwicks of Mavesyn Ridware: see also
Whitaker's Whalley, p. 459.

ARMS.--_Gules, an inescutcheon within an orle of martlets argent_.

Present Representative, John de Heley Mavesyn Chadwick, Esq.




PATTEN OF BANK-HALL.


[Illustration] Richard Patten, who appears to have flourished before
the reign of Henry III. by his marriage with a coheiress of Dagenham
became possessed of the Court of that name in the county of Essex,
and was the remote ancestor of this family. John Patten of Dagenham
Court, living in 1376, removed to Waynflete in Lincolnshire; he was
the great-grandfather of the celebrated William Patten alias
Waynflete Bishop of Winchester; from whose brother, Richard Patten,
of Boslow, in the county of Derby, the present family descend. His
son was of Warrington in this county in 1536.

See the pedigree by Bigland and Heard drawn up in 1770, and printed
in Bloxam's Memorial of Bishop Waynflete for the Caxton Society in
1851.

ARMS.--_Lozengy ermine and sable, a canton gules_.

Present Representative, John Wilson Patten, Esq. M.P. for North
Lancashire.




LEICESTERSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


TURVILE OF HUSBAND'S BOSWORTH.


[Illustration] "One of the ancientest families in the whole shire,"
wrote Burton in 1622; descended from Ralph Turvile, a benefactor to
the abbey of Leicester in 1297. The principal seat was at Normanton
Turvile, in this county, where the elder line of the family became
extinct in 1776. Aston Flamvile, also in Leicestershire, was the
residence of the immediate ancestors of this younger branch. It was
sold early in the eighteenth century, and Husband's Bosworth
inherited, by the will of Maria-Alathea Fortescue, in 1763.

See Nichols's Leicestershire, under Normanton Turvile, iv. pt. 2.
1004; under Aston Flamvile, ii. pt. 2. 465; under Husband's
Bosworth, iv. pt. 2. 451

ARMS.--_Gules, three chevronels vair_. This coat was borne by Sir
Richard Turvile, de co. Warw. in the reign of Edward II., and Sir
Nicholas Turvil, at the same period, bore the same coat reduced to
two chevrons. (Rolls of the date.)

Present Representative, Francis Charles Turvile, Esq.




FARNHAM OF QUORNDON.


[Illustration] This ancient family was certainly seated at Quorndon
two descents before the reign of Edward I. In that of Henry VI.
Thomas, second son of John Farnham and Margaret Billington, living
in 1393, founded a junior branch denominated of "The Nether-Hall."
He was the ancestor of the present family, who also descend in the
female line from the elder branch, denominated "of Quorndon," by the
marriage of the coheiress in 1703 with Benjamin Farnham, of the
Nether-Hall.

See Nichols's History of Leicestershire, vol. iii. pt. i. p. 103.

ARMS.--_Quarterly or and azure, in the first and second quarter a
crescent interchanged_.

Sir Robert de Farnham, of the county of Stafford, bore in the reign
of Edward II. _Quarterly argent and azure, four crescents
counterchanged_. (Roll.)

Present Representative, Edward Basil Farnham, Esq. late M.P. for
North Leicestershire.




BEAUMONT OF COLEORTON, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] Lewis de Brienne, who died in 1283, married Agnes,
Viscountess de Beaumont, who died in 1300: their children took the
name of Beaumont, and from hence this noble family is supposed to be
descended. Coleorton came from the heiress of Maureward in the
fifteenth century, but Grace-dieu, also in this county, was the
older seat. The representative of the elder line of the family was
created Viscount Beaumont in Ireland in 1622, extinct 1702, when
Coleorton went to the ancestors of the present Baronet, descended
from the third son of Nicholas Beaumont, of Coleorton, who died in
1585.

See Nicholas Leicestershire, iii. pt. 2. 743; Wotton's Baronetage,
iii. 230; Erdeswick's Staffordshire, ed. 1844, 396; and Hornby's
Tract on Dugdale's Baronage.

ARMS.--_Azure, semée of fleurs-de-lis and a lion rampant or_. Sir
Henry de Beaumont bore this coat with a _baton gabonny argent and
gules_, in the reign of Edward II.; in that of Richard II. Mons. de
Beaumont omitted the baton (Rolls of the dates.)

Present Representative, Sir George Howland Beaumont, ninth
Baronet.




GREY OF GROBY AND BRADGATE, EARL OF STAMFORD 1628; BARON 1603.


[Illustration] Dugdale begins the pedigree of this great historical
family with Henry de Grey, unto whom King Richard the First in the
sixth year of his reign gave the manor of Turroc or Thurrock in
Essex. His son Richard was of Codnoure or Codnor in Derbyshire,
inherited from his mother, a coheiress of Bardolf. Groby and
Bradgate came from the heiress of Ferrers in the reign of Henry VI.
Of the latter Leland writes, "This parke was parte of the old Erles
of Leicester's landes, and since by heires generales it came to the
Lord Ferrers of Groby, and so to the Greyes."

Extinct Branches of this illustrious family were, the Greys of
Codnor, of Wilton, of Rotherfield, of Ruthyn, and the Dukes of Kent
and Suffolk.

See Dugdale's Baronage, i. 709; Nichols's Leicestershire, iii. pt.
2. 682; Brydges's Collins, iii. 340.

ARMS.--_Barry of six, argent and azure_. Richard de Grey bore this
coat in the reign of Henry III. John de Grey differenced it with _a
label gules_. In the reign of Edward II. the same arms were borne by
different members of the family, with the additions of _a bend
gules, a label gules, a label gules bezantée, a baton gules, and
three torteauxes in chief_, which last was used by the Dukes of
Suffolk.

Present Representative, George Harry Grey, seventh Earl of Stamford
and Warrington.




BABINGTON, OF ROTHLEY-TEMPLE.


[Illustration] The Babingtons were of Babington in Northumberland in
the reign of King John: they afterwards removed into
Nottinghamshire, and became very distinguished. The elder line was
seated at Dethick in Ashover, in the county of Derby, by marriage
with the coheiress of the ancient family of that name, before the
year 1431. The Rothley branch, descended from a second son of the
house of Dethick, was seated there at the very beginning of the
sixteenth century, and is now the chief line of the family on the
extinction of Babington of Dethick about 1650.

See Nichols's Leicestershire, iii. pt. 2. 955; and Collectanea
Topographica et Genealogica, ii. 94, and viii. 313, for a most
valuable article on the elder line of this family. See also
Topographer and Genealogist, i. 133, 259, 333, for the various
branches of this ancient family.

ARMS.--_Argent, ten torteauxes and a label of three points azure_.
This coat reversed and without the label was borne by Sir John de
Babington in the reign of Edward II. (Roll of the date.)

Present Representative, Thomas Gisborne Babington, Esq.




+Gentle.+


HAZLERIGG OF NOSELEY, BARONET 1622.


[Illustration] Originally of Northumberland, where Simon de Hasilrig
was seated in the time of Edward I. Early in the fifteenth century
Thomas Hasilrig of Fawdon, in that county, having married Isabel
Heron, heiress of Noseley, the family removed into Leicestershire.
Leland makes the following mention of the head of the house in his
time, "Hasilrig of Northamptonshire [a mistake for Leicestershire]
hath about 50li lande in Northumbreland, at Esselington, where is a
pratie pile of Hasilriggs; and one of the Coilingwooddes dwellith
now in it, and hath the over-site of his landes."

See Leland's Itin., i. fol. 15. v. fol. 101; Wotton's Baronetage, i.
520; Nichols's Leicestershire, ii. pt. 2. 756; and the Scrope and
Grosvenor Roll, vol. ii. p. 325.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three hazel-leaves slipped vert_.

Present Representative, Sir Arthur Grey Hazlerigg, 12th
Baronet.




WOLLASTON OF SHENTON.


[Illustration] The Wollastons were lords of the manor of Wollaston
in the parish of Old Swinford and county of Stafford, (which they
sold to the Aston family in the time of Richard II.) at a very early
period: they afterwards settled at Trescot and Perton, in the parish
of Tettenhall, in the same shire. The pedigree in Nichols's
Leicestershire begins with Thomas Wollaston of Perton, "a person of
figure in the reigns of Henry VII. and VIII." In 1709, William
Wollaston, Esq., the celebrated author of "The Religion of Nature,"
compiled an account of this family, which is printed in the History
of Leicestershire. He was the direct ancestor of the present family,
who have been also seated at Oncott, in Staffordshire, and
Finborough Hall, in Suffolk. Shenton was acquired early in the reign
of James I.

See Nichols's Leicestershire, iv. pt. 2. 541.

ARMS.--_Argent, three mullets pierced sable_.

Present Representative, Frederick William Wollaston, Esq.




LINCOLNSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


WELBY OF DENTON, BARONET 1801.


[Illustration] Welby, near Grantham, in this county, is supposed to
have given name to this "ancient howse, Bering armes,"* and here Sir
William Welby, who heads their well-authenticated pedigree,
undoubtedly possessed property between 1307 and 1327. The manor of
Frieston, with Poynton Hall, also in Lincolnshire, was held by Sir
Thomas Welby, (who it cannot be doubted was a still earlier
ancestor,) of King Henry III. in chief, in 1216. The first-mentioned
Sir William having married the heiress of Multon of Multon in this
county, that place continued, till the end of the sixteenth century,
the principal seat of his descendants. Denton was purchased by John
Welby, the ancestor of the present family, in 1539.

See "Notices of the Family of Welby," 8vo., Grantham, 1842; and
Allen's History of Lincolnshire, ii. 314; for Welby of Multon, see
Blore's Rutlandshire, 192.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess between three fleurs-de-lis argent_.

Present Representative, Sir Glynne Earle Welby, 3rd Baronet.

  * So styled in the Heralds' grant of crest in 1562.




DYMOKE OF SCRIVELSBY, CHAMPION OF ENGLAND.


[Illustration] The name is supposed to be derived from Dimmok, in
the county of Gloucester, but the pedigree is not proved beyond
Henry Dymmok in the second year of Edward III. His grandson John
married Margaret, sole grand-daughter and heir of Sir Thomas de
Ludlowe, by Joan youngest daughter and coheir of Philip last Lord
Marmyon, Baron of Scrivelsby, and by the tenure of that manor
hereditary Champion of England, which office, since the Coronation
of Richard II. has been held by the Dymoke family.

See Banks's Family of Marmyon, p. 117; and Allen's Lincolnshire, ii.
83.

ARMS.--_Sable, two lions passant argent crowned or_. Borne by Monsr.
John Dymoke in the reign of Richard II. (Roll of the date.)

Present Representative, The Honourable and Rev. John Dymoke.




HENEAGE OF HAINTON.


[Illustration] John Heneage stands at the head of the pedigree; he
was living in the 38th Henry III. From him descended another John,
who in the 10th of Edward III. was Lord of the Manor of Hainton;
according to Leland however, "the olde Henege lands passid not a
fyfetie poundes by the yere." The family evidently rose on the ruins
of the monastic houses: "Syr Thomas Hennage hath doone much cost at
Haynton, where he is Lorde and Patrone, yn translating and new
building with brike and abbay stone."

See Leland's Itinerary, vii. fol. 52; and Allen's History of
Lincolnshire, ii. 67.

ARMS.--_Or, a greyhound courant sable between three leopard's heads
azure, a border engrailed gules_.

Present Representative, Edward Heneage, Esq., M.P. for Lincoln.




MANNERS OF BELVOIR CASTLE, DUKE OF RUTLAND 1703, EARL 1525.

[Illustration] Originally of Northumberland, where the family were
seated at an early period. The first recorded ancestor is Sir Robert
de Maners, who obtained a grant of land in Berrington in 1327, and
was M.P. for Northumberland in 1340. His son William Maners, of
Etal, died before 1324, which estate appears to have been inherited
from an heiress of Muschamp. At the end of the fifteenth century, by
marriage with the heiress of the baronial family of Roos, the house
of Manners came into possession of the Castle of Belvoir. In the
succeeding century, a fortunate match with the heiress of Vernon of
Haddon still further increased the wealth and importance of this
noble family.

The royal title of Rutland, which had belonged to the house of York,
was conferred upon Thomas Lord Roos in 1525 as the grandson of the
lady Anne of York, sister to King Edward the Fourth.

An extinct branch was from the time of Henry VIII. for a long period
of Newmanor House, in the parish of Framlington, in Durham. Another
branch of the Etal family was of Cheswick, in the same county,
extinct after 1633.

See Raine's North Durham, 211, 230; Nichols's Leicestershire, ii.
pt. i. 67; and Brydges's Collins, i. 454.

ARMS.--_Or, two bars azure; a chief quarterly azure and gules, on
the_ 1_st and_ 4_th two fleurs-de-lis, on the_ 2_nd and_ 3_rd a
leopard of England of the first_; the chief being an augmentation
granted by Henry VIII. The ancient arms, no doubt founded on those
of the Muschamp family, were, _Or, two bars azure, a chief gules_.
See the Rolls of the reign of Edward II. and Richard III.

Present Representative, Charles Cecil John Manners, sixth Duke of
Rutland.




ALINGTON OF SWINHOPE.


[Illustration] This is a branch of the extinct family of the Lords
Alington, of Horseheath, in Cambridgeshire, who were originally of
Alington, in the same county, soon after the Conquest. The family
descend from a younger son of Sir Giles Alington, and were seated at
Swinhope in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

See Clutterbuck's History of Hertfordshire, ii. 542; and Collectanea
Topog. et Genealog. iv. 33-53, and note 2, p. 39. For Horseheath,
see Topographer, ii. 374.

ARMS.--_Sable, a bend engrailed between six billets argent_.

Present Representative, George Marmaduke Alington, Esq.




+Gentle.+


THOROLD OF MARSTON, BARONET 1642.


[Illustration] It has been supposed, but without any evidence or
authority, that this family is descended from Thorold, Sheriff of
Lincolnshire in 1052, and that consequently it may claim Saxon
origin. There is however no doubt that this is a family of very
great antiquity, and seated at Marston as early as the reign of
Henry I.

See Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 338, and iv. 250.

ARMS.--_Sable, three goats salient argent_.

Present Representative, Sir John Charles Thorold, 11th Baronet.




LANGTON OF LANGTON.


[Illustration] "Langton, Sir," exclaimed Dr. Johnson, alluding to
his friend Bennet Langton of Langton, at that time the accomplished
head of this very ancient family, "has a grant of free warren from
Henry the Second, and Cardinal Stephen Langton in King John's reign
was of this family." The name is derived from Langton-by-Spilsby in
Lincolnshire, a manor which has remained to the present day the
inheritance of this house, who are descended in the female line from
the Massingberds of Sutterton in this county.

Younger branch. The Langton-Massingberds of Gunby.

See Allen's History of the County of Lincoln, ii. 175; and Boswell's
Life of Johnson, ed. 1836, i. 294.

ARMS.--_Paly of six argent and sable, a bend or_.

Present Representative, Bennet Rothes Langton, Esq.




MASSINGBERD OF WRANGLE.


[Illustration] This very ancient family is descended from Lambert
Massyngberd of Soterton, now Sutterton, in this county, who lived in
the reign of Edward I. and has ever since remained in Lincolnshire.
In the latter part of the fifteenth century, by the marriage of Sir
Thomas Massyngberd with the heiress of Braytoft of Braytoft Hall in
Gunby, the Massingberds removed to that place, which became
the principal seat of their descendants. Ormsby, purchased from the
Skipwiths in 1636, and afterwards Gunby Hall, built by Sir William
Massingberd, the 2nd Baronet of this family, in 1699, was their
principal residence, till it went by an heiress to a younger branch
of the Langtons, who have assumed the name. Wrangle is a recent
purchase in this county by the present representative of the male
line of the family. The Massingberds early embraced the Reformed
faith. Thomas Massingberd, the last representative for Calais in
1552, "fled abroad for his religion" under Mary. Nevertheless his
descendant, William Burrell Massingberd of Ormsby, joined Prince
Charles Edward at Derby: a miniature given to him by the Prince is
still in the family. Ormsby belongs at present to a younger branch
of the Mundys of Markeaton in Derbyshire, who have assumed the name
of Massingberd.

See the Genealogy of this House, a MS. by Robert Dale, Suffolk
Herald, compiled about the year 1718, and still at Ormsby; and
Allen's History of the County, under Ormsby and Gunby.

ARMS.--_Azure, three quatrefoils (two and one,) and in chief a boar
passant or, charged on the shoulder with a cross patée gules_, with
which the following coat is generally quartered, said to be the arms
assumed by Sir Thomas Massingberd, Knight of St. John, in the reign
of Henry VIII. _Quarterly or and argent, on a cross humetté gules,
between four lions rampant sable, two escallops of the first_.

Present Representative, The Rev. Francis Charles Massingberd.




MONSON OF BURTON, BARON MONSON 1728, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] "In the Isle" of Axholme "be now there 4 gentilmen of
name, Sheffild, Candisch, Evers, and _Mounsun_. The lands of one
Bellewodde became by marriage to this Mounson, a younger son to old
Mounson of Lincolnshire. This old Mounson is in a maner the first
avauncer of his family." Thus wrote Leland in his Itinerary. The
Monsons however are clearly traced to the year 1378, as resident at
East-Reson, in this county. They were afterwards seated at South
Carlton, a village adjacent to Burton.

See Leland's Itin., i. fol. 42; Allen's Lincolnshire, ii. 57; and
Brydges's Collins, vii. 228.

ARMS.--_Or, two chevronels gules_.

Present Representative, William John Monson, 7th Baron Monson.




WHICHCOTE OF ASWARBY, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] This is an ancient Shropshire house descended from
William de Whichcote, of Whichcote, in that county, in 1255. In the
reign of Edward IV., by marriage with the heiress of Tyrwhitt, the
family became possessed of Harpswell in this county, which for a
long time continued the residence of the Whichcotes.

See Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 13; and Allen's History of
Lincolnshire, i. 38.

ARMS.--_Ermine, two boars passant in pale gules_.

Present Representative, Sir Thomas Whichcote, 7th Baronet.




ANDERSON OF BROCKLESBY, EARL OF YARBOROUGH 1837, BARON YARBOROUGH
1794.


[Illustration] Roger Anderson of Wrawby, in this county, Esquire,
living in the latter part of the fourteenth century, and who came
from Northumberland, stands at the head of the pedigree. His
great-grandson Henry, also of Wrawby, was grandfather of Sir Edmund
Anderson of Flixborough, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, who died in 1605. He was the ancestor of the present family,
and of Sir Charles Anderson of Broughton in Lincolnshire, Baronet
1660, and of the Andersons of Eyworth in Bedfordshire, Baronets
1664, extinct in 1773. Brocklesby came from an heiress of Pelham, a
younger branch of the Pelhams Earls of Chichester.

See Wotton's English Baronetage, vol. iii. p. 191, vol. iv. p. 427,
and "The History of Lea," printed in 1841.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three crosses flory sable_.

Present Representative, Charles Anderson Pelham, 3rd Earl of
Yarborough.




BERTIE OF UFFINGTON, EARL OF LINDSEY 1626.


[Illustration] The ancient extraction of the Berties from Berstead
in the county of Kent is proved by the Thurnham charters in the
possession of Sir Edward Dering, and by various public records of
undoubted authority; and, although the exact line of pedigree is by
no means clear, there appears no reason to doubt the descent of this
"undefamed house" from John or Bartholomew de Bereteghe, who were
living in the 35th of Edward I. The marriage of Richard Bertie son
of Robert, who died in 1500, with Katherine daughter of William
Willoughby, last Lord Willoughby of Eresby, and widow of Charles
Brandon, Duke of Suffolk, was, as is well known, the origin of the
consequence of this right loyal family, five generations of whose
history have been so agreeably illustrated by Lady Georgiana Bertie.
Grimsthorpe, inherited from the Duchess of Suffolk from her paternal
Willoughby ancestors, became the principal seat of the Berties,
Barons Willoughby of Eresby and Lords Great Chamberlains of England,
advanced in the person of Robert second Lord Willoughby to the
Earldom of Lindsey by King Charles I. His great-grandson was created
Duke of Ancaster and Kesteven in 1715, which titles became extinct
on the decease of the fifth Duke in 1809. The Earldom of Lindsey and
representation of the family thereupon devolved on the father of the
present Earl, descended from the fifth son of the second Earl of
Lindsey by his first wife.

Younger branch, the Earl of Abingdon 1682, Baron Norreys of Rycote
1572, descended from the second marriage of the second Earl of
Lindsey and the heiress of Wray, whose mother was the sole
heir of Francis Norreys, Earl of Berkshire, and Lord Norreys of
Rycote.

See Lady G. Bertie's "Five Generations of a Loyal House," 4to. 1845,
and Brydges's Collins, vol. ii. p. 1, vol. iii. 628.

ARMS.--_Argent, three battering rams barways in pale azure, armed
and garnished or_. The "docquet or grant" in the fourth of Edward
VI. gives the arms, _Quarterly,_ 1 _and_ 4, _Argent, a battering ram
azure, garnished or;_ 2 _and_ 3, _Sable a tower argent_.

Present Representative, George Augustus Frederick Albemarle Bertie,
10th Earl of Lindsey.




NORFOLK.


+Knightly.+


WODEHOUSE OF KIMBERLEY, BARON WODEHOUSE 1797, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] "This family is very ancient, for they were gentlemen
of good ranke in the time of King John, as it appeareth by many
ancient grants and evidences of theirs which I have seen," wrote
Peacham in his "Compleate Gentleman," in 1634. (p. 191.) The name is
local, being derived from Wodehouse in Silfield, in this county; but
as early as the reign of Henry III. the family had property in
Kimberley, and in that of Henry IV. the manor was also inherited
from the heiress of Fastolff.

See Blomefield's Norfolk, ed. 1739, vol. i. p. 751, for long
extracts from the curious old pedigree in verse; Wotton's
Baronetage, i. 164; and Brydges's Collins's Peerage, viii. 562.

ARMS.--_Sable, a chevron or, guttée de sang, between three
cinquefoils ermine_. This coat is said to have been augmented as now
borne, by Henry V. in honour of John Wodehouse's valour at the
Battle of Agincourt, the _guttée de sang_, not at present considered
very good heraldry, being then added. The supporters, two wode or
wild men, were also, it has been said, then first used.

Present Representative, John Wodehouse, 3rd Baron Wodehouse, Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland.




WALPOLE OF WOLTERTON, EARL OF ORFORD 1806, BARON 1723.


[Illustration] Walpole, in Mershland, in this county, gave name to
this historical family, and here Joceline de Walpole was living in
the reign of Stephen. Reginald de Walpole, in the time of Henry I.
seems to have been lineal ancestor of the house. He was father of
Richard, who married Emma, daughter of Walter de Hawton, or
Houghton, which at a very early period became the family seat, and
which, after the death of the third Earl of the first creation,
passed to the issue of his aunt Mary, Viscountess Malpas, daughter
of Sir Robert Walpole; whose descendant, the Marquess of
Cholmondeley, is the present possessor.

See Blomefield, iii. 796, and iv. 708; also Brydges's Collins, v.
631.

ARMS.--_Or, on a fess between two chevrons sable three
cross-crosslets of the first_.

Present Representative, Horatio William Walpole, 4th Earl of
Orford.




BERNEY OF KIRBY BEEDON, BARONET 1620.


[Illustration] Berney, in the hundred of North Greenhow in this
county, doubtless gave name to this ancient family, who are traced
pretty nearly to the Conquest. Park Hall, the former seat, is in the
parish of Reedham, and was acquired by the marriage of Sir Thomas de
Berney with Margaret daughter and heir of Sir William de Reedham in
the reign of Edward III.

Younger branch, Berney of Morton Hall in this county, descended from
a younger brother of the first Baronet.

See Parkins's continuation of Blomefield's Norfolk, v. 1482; and
Wotton's Baronetage, i. 378.

ARMS.--_Party per pale gules and azure, a cross engrailed ermine_.

Present Representative, Sir Henry Hanson Berney, 9th Baronet.




ASTLEY, OF MELTON-CONSTABLE, BARON HASTINGS 1841, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] Descended from the noble house of Astley Castle in
Warwickshire, and traced to Philip de Estlega in the 12th of Henry
II., and in the female line from the Constables of Melton-Constable,
which estate came into the family by the second marriage of Thomas
Lord Astley with Edith, third sister and coheir of Geffrey de
Constable, in the time of Henry III. Astley Castle, the original
seat, descended by an heiress to the Greys of Ruthin, afterwards
Marquesses of Dorset, and Dukes of Suffolk. Hill-Morton in
Warwickshire was also the seat of this family from the reign of
Henry III.

The Astleys formerly of Patishull in Staffordshire were the elder
branch, sprung from the first marriage of Thomas Lord Astley, who
was killed in the Barons' Wars at Evesham, (the 49th of Henry III.,)
extinct 1771. The Astleys, now of Everley, in Wiltshire, Baronets
1821, descend from the second son of Walter Astley of Patishull, the
father of the first Baronet of that line (1662).

See Parkins's Blomefield's Norfolk, v. 940; Thomas's Dugdale's
Warwickshire, i. 19, 107; and Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 63; for
Astleys of Patishull, Shaw's Staffordshire, ii. 287; and Wotton's
Baronetage, iii. 368.

ARMS.--_Azure, a cinquefoil ermine within a border engrailed or_.
The Patishull and Everley family omit the border, and it was thus
borne by the head of the house in the reign of Richard II. Thomas de
Astley, at the same period, differenced his coat by _a label of
three points or, charged with two bars gules_. (Rolls.)

Present Representative, Jacob Henry Delaval Astley, 3rd Baron
Hastings.




BEDINGFELD OF OXBOROUGH, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] Traditionally a Norman family seated at Bedingfeld,
in Suffolk, soon after the Conquest. Oxburgh, or Oxborough, has been
the residence of this eminently knightly house from the reign of
Edward IV., when it came by the marriage of Edmund Bedingfeld with
Margaret, daughter of Robert Tudenham, and to whom licence was
granted to build the walls and towers of Oxburgh in the year 1482.
The baronetcy was conferred by Charles II. as a mark of his favour
and in consideration of the eminent loyalty and consequent
sufferings of the family during the usurpation. The Bedingfelds of
Ditchingham, in this county, are a younger branch parted from the
parent stem as early as the middle of the fourteenth century.

See Blomefield, iii. 482; Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 212; and the
Rev. G. H. M'Gill's account of Oxburgh Hall in the Proceedings of
the Norfolk Archeological Society.

ARMS.--_Ermine, an eagle displayed gules, armed or_.

Present Representative, Sir Henry George Paston Bedingfeld, 7th
Baronet.




HOWARD OF EAST-WINCH, DUKE OF NORFOLK 1483.


[Illustration] The great historical house of Howard in point of
antiquity must yield precedence to many other English families: it
can only be traced with certainty to Sir William Howard, Judge of
the Common Pleas in 1297. Norfolk appears to be the county where
this great family should be noticed, the Duke of Norfolk still
possessing property in the county of his dukedom derived from his
ancestors of the house of Bigod. In the fourteenth century, by the
match with the heiress of Mowbray, the foundation of the honors and
consequence of the Howards was laid, the first Duke being the son of
Margaret, daughter and coheir of Thomas de Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
The Sussex estates came from the heiress of Fitzalan, Earl of
Arundel, in the reign of Edward VI.; Worksop from the Talbots;
Greystoke and Morpeth from the Dacres.

All the English Peers of the house of Howard are traced to a common
ancestor in Thomas, the second Duke of Norfolk, who died in 1524.
The Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Suffolk and Carlisle, descend from
his first wife, and the Earl of Effingham from the second. The
Howards of Greystoke, in Cumberland, are a younger branch of the
present ducal house. The Howards of Corby Castle, in the same
county, descend from the second son of "Belted Will," the ancestor
of the house of Carlisle.

Extinct branches. The Viscount Bindon; the Earls of Northampton,
Nottingham, and Stafford; and Lord Howard of Escrick.

See Brydges's Collins, i. 50, for the Duke of Norfolk; iii. 147,
for the Earl of Suffolk; iii. 501, for the Earl of Carlisle; and iv.
264, for the Earl of Effingham. See also Cartwright's Rape of
Bramber, p. 185; and Dallaway's Rape of Arundel; Hunter's South
Yorkshire, ii. 10. For the Howard Monuments at East-Winch, see
Weever's Funeral Monuments, p. 842-9; for their state in the 18th
century Parkins's Blomefield's Norfolk, iv. 746; and Topographer and
Genealogist, ii. 90. For the Earl of Carlisle, see Hodgson's History
of Northumberland, ii. pt. 2, p. 381; for Howard of Corby, the same
vol. p. 477. See also "Historical Anecdotes of some of the Howard
Family," 12mo. 1769; Tierney's Castle and Town of Arundel, 8vo.
1834; and Mr. Howard's "Indication of Memorials, &c. of the Howard
Family," fol. 1834.

ARMS.--_Gules, a bend between six cross-crosslets fitcheé argent, on
an escucheon a demi-lion pierced through the mouth with an arrow,
within a double tressure flory counter-flory gules_, granted by
patent 5 Henry VIII. to Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, in
remembrance of the victory gained over the Scots at Flodden. The
present coat was borne by Sir John Howard in the reign of Edward
II., and by Mr. Howard in those of Edward II. and Richard III.: it
has been conjectured, from the similarity of this coat with that of
the Botilers, Barons of Wem, (Gules, a fess cheeky argent and sable
between six crosses pateé fitchée argent,) that Sir William Howard
the Judge was descended from the Hords, stewards to these Barons: it
is observable that none of the Howards ever prefixed the _de_ to
their name, a fact which opposes their derivation from Hawarden in
Flintshire. (Blakeway's Sheriffs of Shropshire, pp. 53 note.)

Present Representative, Henry Fitzalan Howard, 15th Duke of
Norfolk.




GURNEY OF KESWICK.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of the Gurneys of West
Barsham in this county, whose principal male line became extinct in
1661, West Barsham came from the heiress of Waunci about the reign
of Edward III. Previous to that time the Gurneys appear to have been
seated at Harpley, also in Norfolk, as early as 1206, and are traced
for two descents beyond that period, being (as there appears no
reason to doubt) descended from the great Norman baronial house of
the name. The present family may be said to have been refounded by
John Gurney, an eminent silk-merchant at Norwich, about 1670.
Keswick was purchased in 1747. The Gournays of Somersetshire,
represented by the Earls of Egmont, may have been a distinct family;
their arms were, Paly of six or and azure. Dugdale, however, gives
them a common ancestor with the former house. (Baronage, i. 429.)

See the "Records of the House of Gournay," privately printed, 4to.,
1848, and particularly, for the Norman origin of the family page 293
of that work. For the Gournays of Somersetshire, see the History of
the House of Ivery. London, 1742, vol. ii. p. 473,

ARMS.--_Argent, a cross engrailed gules, in the first quarter a
cinquefoil azure_.

Present Representative, Hudson Gurney, Esq.




DE GREY OF MERTON, BARON WALSINGHAM 1780.


[Illustration] This ancient family is supposed to have the same
origin as the noble Norman house of Grey, now represented by the
Earl of Stamford; it is traced to William de Grey, of Cavendish, in
Suffolk; whose grandson Sir Thomas was seated about 1306 at Cornerth
in that county, by his marriage with the heiress of the same name;
their son and heir married the coheiress of Baynard, and thus became
possessed of Merton, the long-continued seat of this family.

See Blomefield, i. 576; and Brydges's Collins, vii. 510.

ARMS.--_Barry of six argent and azure, in chief three annulets
gules_. The ancient coat of Cornerth, _Azure, a fess between two
chevronels or_, (which was doubtless derived from their superior
lords the Baynards,) was borne for many generations by the ancestors
of this family.

Present Representative, Thomas de Grey, 5th Baron Walsingham.




BACON OF RAVENINGHAM, PREMIER BARONET OF ENGLAND, OF REDGRAVE,
SUFFOLK, 1611.


[Illustration] This family is said to have been established at a
period shortly subsequent to the Conquest at Letheringsett, in
Norfolk, but is better known as a Suffolk family, having been seated
at Monks' Bradfield, in that county, in the reign of Richard I.
Redgrave was granted by Henry VIII. in the 36th year of his reign,
to the great Sir Nicholas Bacon, who with Francis his son, Viscount
St. Alban's, were the principal ornaments of this family.
Raveningham descended to the Bacons from the heiress of the ancient
family of Castell, or de Castello, about the middle of the 18th
century.

See Parkins's Continuation of Blomefield's Norfolk, iv. 262 Wotton's
Baronetage, i. 1, and ii. 72.

ARMS.--_Gules, on a chief argent two mullets pierced sable_. This
coat was borne by Sir Edmund Bacon, in the reign of Edward II., and
by M. Bacon in that of Edward III. (Rolls.) A brass circa A.D. 1320,
at Gorleston church, Suffolk, supposed to represent one of this
family, bears five lozenges in bend on the field, besides the
mullets in chief: see Boutell's Brasses, p. 36.

Present Representative, Sir Henry Hickman Bacon, 11th Baronet.




JERNINGHAM OF COSSEY, BARON STAFFORD, RESTORED 1824, BARONET 1621.


[Illustration] The ancestors of this ancient house were seated at
Horham in Suffolk in the 13th century, "knights of high esteem in
those parts," saith Camden, and traced to Sir Hubert Jernegan of
that place. Somerleyton, in the same county, derived from the
heiress of Fitzosbert, afterwards became the family seat, and so
continued until the extinction of the elder line. Cossey was granted
to Sir Henry Jerningham, (son of Sir Edward Jerningham, by his
second wife,) in 1547, by Queen Mary, "being the first that appeared
openly for her after the death of Edward VI." He was the ancestor of
Lord Stafford.

See Weever's Ancient Funerall Monuments, p. 769; Blomefield's
Norfolk, i. p. 660; Wotton's Baronetage, i. 450; and Suckling's
History of Suffolk, ii. p. 46.

ARMS.--_Argent, three buckles gules_.

Present Representative, Henry Valentine Stafford Jerningham, 9th
Baron Stafford.




TOWNSHEND OF RAINHAM, MARQUESS TOWNSHEND 1787; BARON 1661; VISCOUNT
1682.


[Illustration] In 1377, the ancestor of this family was of Snoring
Magna in this county. In 1398, John Townshend settled at Rainham,
which according to some accounts accrued to them by the heiress of
Havile, but the pedigree as given by Collins cannot be relied on,
neither can the defamatory account of Leland, who says--"the
grandfather of Townsende now living was a meane man of substance."
The truth seems to be that the family is old, but not of great
account before the time of Sir Walter de Townsend, who married Maud
Scogan, and flourished about the year 1400.

See Blomefield, iii. 815; Brydges's Collins, ii. 454; and Leland's
Itinerary, iv. p. 13.

ARMS.--_Azure, a chevron ermine between three escallops argent_.

Present Representative, John Villiers Stuart Townshend, 5th Marquess
Townshend.




NORTHAMPTONSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


WAKE OF COURTEENHALL, BARONET 1621.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of the very ancient baronial
house of Wake, who were Lincolnshire Barons in the reign of Henry I.
Sir Hugh Wake was lord of Deeping in the county of Lincoln, and of
Blisworth in this county, by gift of his father, Baldwin fourth Lord
Wake. He died in 1315, and was the direct ancestor of the present
Baronet. See memoir of the family of Wake privately printed in 1833,
but written by Archbishop Wake; and Wotton's Baronetage, i. 465.

ARMS.--_Or, two bars gules, in chief three torteauxes_. This coat
was borne by Hugh Wake in the reign of Henry III., and again by Sir
John Wake in that of Edward II. Sir Hugh Wake at the latter period
differenced his arms by a canton azure. His uncle reversed the
colours gules and argent, the field being gules. M. Thomas Wake de
Blisworth in the reign of Edward III. bore the same arms, with a
border engrailed sable. (Rolls of the dates.)

Present Representative, Sir William Wake, 11th Baronet.




BRUDENELL OF DENE, EARL OF CARDIGAN 1661; BARON 1627; BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] William de Bredenhill, seated at Dodington in
Oxfordshire, in the reign of Edward I., and the owner of lands at
Aynho in this county at the same period, is the first ascertained
ancestor of the Brudenells, whose principal consequence however must
be traced to Sir Robert Brudenell, Chief Justice of the King's Bench
in the reign of Henry VII., who married a coheiress of Entwisell,
and thus became possessed of Dene and of Stanton Wyvill in the
county of Leicester.

See the pedigree of this family in Nichols's History of
Leicestershire, vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 807; see also Brydges's Collins,
iii. 487.

Younger branch. The Marquess of Ailesbury (1821), descended from
Thomas, fourth son of George fourth Earl of Cardigan, and the Lady
Elizabeth Bruce, eldest daughter of Thomas second Earl of Ailesbury.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron gules between three morions azure_.

Present Representative, James Thomas Brudenell, 7th Earl of
Cardigan, K.C.B.




KNIGHTLEY OF FAWSLEY, BARONET 1798.


[Illustration] The first recorded ancestor of this ancient family is
Rainald, mesne lord of Knightley, in the county of Stafford, under
Earl Roger, in the time of William the Conqueror, as appears by
Domesday Book. That estate went out of the family by an heiress who
married Robert de Peshall, about the reign of Edward III., and the
Knightleys removed to Gnowsall, in the same county, in the 17th of
Richard II. (1394). Fawsley was purchased in the 3rd of Henry V.
(1415-16). It is thus mentioned by Leland: "Mr. Knightley, a man of
great lands, hath his principal house at Foullesle, but it is no
very sumptuous thing." (Itin. i. fol. 11.)

See Baker's Northamptonshire, i. 381. Blakeway (Sheriffs of Salop,
p. 103) asserts that "_the Knightleys appear to have been a branch
of the Shirleys_," an assumption without any foundation except the
similarity of their arms.

ARMS.--_Quarterly ermine, and paly of six or and gules_. This coat
was borne as early as 1301-2 (30th Ed. I.) by Sir Robert de
Knyteley: it is also borne by Cotes of Cotes, co. Stafford, probably
from family connection.

Present Representative, Sir Rainald Knightley, 3rd Baronet, M. P.
for South Northamptonshire.




SPENCER OF ALTHORPE, EARL SPENCER 1765.


[Illustration] The Spencers claim a collateral descent from the
ancient baronial house of Le Despenser, a claim which, without being
irreconcileable perhaps with the early pedigrees of that family,
admits of very grave doubts and considerable difficulties. It seems
to be admitted that they descend from Henry Spencer, who, having
been educated in the Abbey of Evesham, obtained from the abbot in
the reign of Henry VI. a lease of the domains and tithes of Badby in
this county, and was induced to settle there. His son removed to
Hodnell in Warwickshire, his grandson to Rodburn in the same county,
his great-grandson Sir John purchased Althorpe in 1508. The Spencers
of Claverdon, co. Warwick (extinct 1685), were a younger branch. The
Dukes of Marlborough (1702) represent the elder line of this family.

See Baker's Northamptonshire, i. 106; and Brydges's Collins, i. 378.

The poet Spenser boasted that he belonged to this house; though,
says Baker, "the precise link of genealogical connexion cannot now
perhaps be ascertained."

ARMS.--_Quarterly, first and fourth argent, second and third gules,
a fret or, over all a bend sable charged with three escallops of the
first_. This coat, which is differenced from the ancient baronial
arms by the three escallop shells, was used by Henry Spencer of
Badby, who sealed his will with it. In 1504 another coat was
granted, viz. _Azure, a fess ermine between six sea-mew's heads
erased argent_, but the more ancient arms have been generally borne
by the Spencers.

Present Representative, John Poyntz Spencer, 5th Earl Spencer.




ROKEBY OF ARTHINGWORTH.


[Illustration] This is a junior branch of the Rokebys of Rokeby in
Yorkshire, a knightly race immortalized by Scott. The principal line
has been long extinct. Sir Thomas Rokeby was Sheriff of Yorkshire in
the eighth of Henry IV. The family was seated in the parish of
Ecclesfield, and also at Sandal-Parva, in South Yorkshire, where
William Rokeby was Rector in the reign of Henry VII. In 1512 he
became Archbishop of Dublin. His brother Ralph wrote the history of
the family, now in possession of Mr. Rokeby of Arthingworth, and
which is printed in Whitaker's Richmondshire, vol. i. p. 158. The
present family acquired Arthingworth from the Langhams by marriage
in the end of the seventeenth century.

See Hunter's South Yorkshire, i. p. 199.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three rooks sable_, borne by Mons.
Thomas de Rokeby in the reigns of Edward III. and Richard II. (Rolls
of the dates.)

Present Representative, the Rev. Henry Ralph Rokeby.




MAUNSELL OF THORPE-MALSOR.


[Illustration] The curious poetical history of this family,
preserved in "Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica," claims one
"Saher," there written "_Sier, the syer of us all_," as their
ancestor: he is stated to have been the son of Ralph Maunsel, who
was living in Buckinghamshire in the 14th of Henry II. (1167).
Thickthornes in Chicheley in that county appears to have been the
residence of the Maunsells, and also Turvey in Bedfordshire. These
lands were sold by William the son of Sampson le Maunsel of Turvey
to William Mordaunt in 1287. The Maunsells afterwards settled at
Bury-End in Chicheley, and in 1622 at Thorpe-Malsor.

Elder Branches. 1. Maunsell of Muddlescombe, co. Carmarthen, Baronet
1621-2. 2. The extinct Barons Maunsell, created 1711, extinct 1744.

Younger Branch. Maunsell of Cosgrave in this county, which came from
the coheiress of Furtho.

See Coll. Topog. et Genealog. i. p. 389; Baker's Northamptonshire,
ii. p. 132; and Memoirs of the family, an unfinished work privately
printed in 1850 by William W. Maunsell, esq.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three maunches sable_.

Present Representative, Thomas Philip Maunsell, Esq. late M. P. for
North Northamptonshire.




+Gentle.+


ISHAM OF LAMPORT, BARONET 1627.


[Illustration] The name is local, from Isham in the hundred of
Orlingbury in this county, where an elder branch of the family was
seated soon after the Conquest. Robert Isham, who died in 1424, is
however the first ancestor from whom the pedigree can with certainty
be deduced. He was Escheator of the county of Northampton, and was
of Picheley (a lordship contiguous to Isham) in the first of Henry
V. Lamport was purchased by John Isham, the immediate ancestor of
the present family, fourth son of Sir Euseby Isham, of Picheley,
Knight, in the year 1559. He was an eminent merchant of London.

See Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 28.

ARMS.--_Gules, a fess and in chief three piles wavy argent_. This
coat was borne by Robert de Isham in the 2nd of Richard II.

Present Representative, Sir Charles Edmund Isham, 10th Baronet.




PALMER OF CARLTON, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] This family appears to have been founded by the law
early in the fifteenth century, and descends from William Palmer,
who was established at the present seat of Carlton in the ninth of
Henry IV. The celebrated Sir Geoffry Palmer, Attorney-General to
Charles II. was the first Baronet.

See Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 19; and Nichols's Leicestershire, vol.
ii. pt. ii. p. 543.

ARMS.--_Sable, a chevron or between three crescents argent_.

Present Representative, Sir Geoffrey Palmer, 8th Baronet.




FANE OF APTHORP, EARL OF WESTMORELAND 1642.


[Illustration] The Fanes or Vanes are said to have originated from
Wales; in the reign of Henry VI. they were seated at Hilden in
Tunbridge, in Kent, by a marriage with the Peshalls. In 1574 Sir
Thomas Fane married Mary daughter and heir of Henry Neville, Lord
Abergavenny; hence the importance of the family, and the Earldom of
Westmoreland, the ancient honour of the house of Neville. Apthorp
came from the heiress of Mildmay, about the end of the reign of
Queen Elizabeth.

Younger Branches. Fane of Wormesley, Oxfordshire, descended from
Henry Fane, Esq., younger brother of Thomas eighth Earl of
Westmoreland. The Duke of Cleveland (1833) and Sir Henry Vane, of
Hutton Hall in Cumberland, Baronet (1786), descend from John younger
brother of Richard Fane, ancestor of the Earl of Westmoreland.

See Brydges's Collins, iii. 283, and iv. 499; Hasted's Kent, ii.
265; and Blore's Rutlandshire, p. 103.

ARMS.--_Azure, three right-hand gauntlets or_.

Present Representative, Francis William Henry Fane, 12th Earl of
Westmoreland.




NORTHUMBERLAND.


+Knightly.+


CLAVERING OF CALLALY CASTLE.


[Illustration] Robert Fitz-Roger, Baron of Warkworth, the ancestor
of this great Norman family, was father of John, who assumed the
name of "Clavering," from a lordship in Essex, as it is said, by the
appointment of King Edward I. From Sir Alan, younger brother of
John, the present family is descended. Callaly was granted to Robert
Fitz-Roger by Gilbert de Callaly in the reign of Henry III., and has
ever since continued in the possession of the house of Clavering.

Younger Branches. Clavering of Axwell, co. Durham, Baronet 1661,
descended from James, third son of Robert Clavering of Callaly.
Clavering of Berrington in North Durham, descended from William,
third son of Sir John Clavering, who died a prisoner in London for
his loyalty to King Charles I. Extinct about 1812.

See Nicolas's Siege of Carlaverock, pp. 115, 117; Mackenzie's View
of Northumberland, vol. ii. p. 27; Surtees's Durham, ii. 248;
Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 295; and Raine's North Durham, p. 213.

ARMS.--_Quarterly or and gules, a bend sable_, and so borne by
Robert Fitz-Roger, as appears by the Roll of Carlaverock, and by his
son John de Clavering, who differenced his coat by a label vert. Sir
Alexander de Clavering, in the reign of Edward II., charged the bend
with three mullets argent. John Clavering, in the reign of Richard
II., the same arms, with a label of three points argent. (Rolls of
the dates.)

Present Representative, Edward John Clavering, Esq.




MITFORD OF MITFORD CASTLE.


[Illustration] Descended from Mathew, brother of John, who is said
to have held the Castle of Mitford soon after the Conquest, and by
whose only daughter and heiress it went to the Bertrams. The
ancestors of the present family appear to have been for many ages
resident at Mitford, though the castle was not in their possession
till it was granted with the manor by Charles II. to Robert Mitford,
Esq.

Younger Branches. Mitford of Pitshill, co. Sussex, descended from
the fourth son of Robert Mitford of Mitford Castle, Esq., Sheriff of
Yorkshire in 1702. Mitford of Exbury, co. Southampton, sprung from
the third son of Robert Mitford, of Mitford Castle, Esq., who died
in 1674. From this latter branch Mitford Baron Redesdale (1803) of
Batsford, co. Gloucester, is derived.

See Hodgson's History of Northumberland, vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 44 and
for Mitford of Exbury the same work, vol. i. pt. ii. p. 152; see
also Brydges's Collins, ix. 182.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess sable between three moles proper_.

Present Representative, Robert Mitford, Esq.




SWINBURNE OF CAPHEATON, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] Swinburne in this county gave name to this ancient
family, the first recorded ancestor being John, father of Sir
William de Swinburne, living in 1278, and Alan Swinburne, Rector of
Whitfield, who purchased Capheaton from Sir Thomas Fenwick, Knt., in
1274.

Chollerton in Northumberland was also an ancient seat of the
Swinburnes; it was held under the great Umfrevile family by this
same Sir William de Swinburne, the arms being evidently founded upon
the coat of the Umfreviles. The date of the baronetcy points to the
loyalty of the family during the civil wars of the seventeenth
century.

See the early part of the pedigree in Surtees's Durham, ii. 872;
Hodgson's History of Northumberland, vol. i. pt. ii. p. 231; and
Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 167.

ARMS.--_Per fess gules and argent, three cinquefoils
counterchanged_, borne by Monsieur William Swynburne in the reign of
Richard II. (Roll of the date.)

Present Representative, Sir John Swinburne, 7th Baronet.




MIDDLETON (CALLED MONCK) OF BELSEY CASTLE, BARONET 1662.


[Illustration] John de Middleton, father of Sir Richard Middleton,
sometime secretary and chancellor to King Henry III., is the first
on record of the ancestors of this family. The castle of Belsey
appears to have come from the heiress of Stryvelin in the reign of
Edward III. The name was exchanged for Monck in 1799. A younger
branch, now extinct, was of Silksworth, co. Durham.

See Hodgson's History of Northumberland, vol. i. pt. ii. p. 353;
"The Record of the House of Gourney," 4to, pr. pr. 1848, p. 560; and
Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 382.

ARMS.--_Quarterly gules and or, in the first quarter a cross flory
argent_.

Present Representative, Sir Charles Miles Lambert Monck, sixth
Baronet.




SELBY OF BIDDLESTON.


[Illustration] In 1272, King Edward I. granted in the first year of
his reign the lands of Biddleston to Sir Walter de Selby: it has
ever since remained in the possession of his descendants, and has
been usually the chief seat of the Selbys. Their early history
unfortunately is defective, occasioned by an accidental fire which
took place at Allenton in 1721, at that time the residence of the
family, whose evidences were thereby mostly destroyed.

For the grant above mentioned, and for the pedigree, see Mackenzie's
View of Northumberland, ii. 39.

ARMS.--_Barry of eight or and sable_.

Present Representative, Walter Selby, Esq.




GREY OF HOWICK, EARL GREY 1806, BARONET 1746.


[Illustration] An eminent border family, of which there have been
many branches, descended from Thomas Grey of Heton, living in the
second of Edward I. (1273), and from Sir John Grey of Berwick,
living in 1372, who was ancestor of the baronial house of Grey of
Wark and Chillingham, and of the Howick family, founded by Sir
Edward Grey of Howick, who died in 1532, and was the fourth son of.
Sir Ralph Grey of Chillingham.

"No family perhaps in the whole of England," writes Raine in his
admirable History of North Durham, "has in the course of the
centuries through which the line of Grey can be traced, afforded so
great a variety of character."

Younger Branches. Sir George Grey, Baronet 1814, and Grey of
Morwick, co. Northumberland.

See the curious and valuable "Illustrations of the Pedigree of
Grey," in Raine's North Durham, p. 327, &c.; Surtees's Durham, ii.
19; and Brydges's Collins, v. 676.

ARMS.--_Gules, a lion rampant within a border engrailed argent, a
mullet for difference_. The present coat was borne by Monsieur
Thomas Grey, as appears by the Roll of the reign of Richard II.

Present Representative, Henry George Grey, 3rd Earl Grey, K. G.




+Gentle.+


LORAINE OF KIRK-HARLE, BARONET 1664.


[Illustration] This is said to be a Norman family, and to have been
originally settled in the county of Durham. Kirk-Harle was inherited
from Johanna, daughter of William, son of Alan del Strother, in the
time of Henry IV.

See Hodgson's History of Northumberland, vol. i. pt. ii. p. 246; and
Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 433.

ARMS.--_Quarterly sable and argent, a plain cross counter quartered
of the field_. Another coat, viz. _Argent, five lozenges conjoined
in pale azure, in the dexter chief an escucheon of the second_, is
given in Courthope's Debrett's Baronetage.

Present Representative, Sir Lambton Loraine, 11th Baronet.




HAGGERSTON OF ELLINGHAM, BARONET 1643.


[Illustration] The pedigree is not regularly traced beyond Robert de
Hagreston, Lord of Hagreston in 1399, although a Robert de
Hagardeston occurs in 1312. It has been supposed that this family is
of Scotch extraction; but a fire which took place at Haggerston
Castle, the ancestral seat of this house, in the year 1618, and
another which happened in 1687, having destroyed the ancient
evidences, the early history is somewhat imperfect.

See Mackenzie's Northumberland, i. p. 328, note; Raine's North
Durham, p. 224; and Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 388.

ARMS.--_Azure, on a bend cotised argent three billets sable_. The
ancient arms of this venerable family, of which Raine writes, "few
families can boast of such a pedigree or of such a shield of arms,"
was a scaling ladder between two leaves, alluding to the coat of
Hazlerigg, an heiress of that house having married into the
Haggerston family. The arms were so borne in 1577, as appears by a
seal of that date: the scaling ladder was afterwards corrupted into
the bendlets and billets.

Present Representative, Sir John Haggerston, 9th Baronet.




RIDLEY OF BLAGDON, BARONET 1756.


[Illustration] The pedigree is proved for three descents before the
reign of Henry VIII., the original seat of the family being at
Willimoteswick in this county, of which place Nicholas de Rydle is
designated Esquire in 1481; here also was born the Martyr Bishop of
London, Nicholas Ridley, early in the sixteenth century.

The present family is a younger branch, seated at Blagdon and
inheriting the baronetcy on the death of Sir Mathew White in 1763.

See Hodgson's History of Northumberland, vol. ii. pt. ii. p. 322,
and vol. iii. pt. ii. p. 340.

ARMS.--_Gules, a chevron between three goshawks argent_. The more
ancient coat was, _Argent, an ox passant gules through reeds
proper_.

Present Representative, Sir Mathew White Ridley, 4th Baronet.




NOTTINGHAMSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


CLIFTON OF CLIFTON, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] Gervase de Clifton, living in the fifth of John, is
the patriarch of this honourable family, who took their name from
the manor of Clifton, which was the inheritance of Sir Gervase
Clifton, in the ninth of Edward II. One of the most remarkable
members was the first Baronet, Sir Gervase Clifton, who died in
1666, "very prosperous and beloved of all, after having been the
husband of seven wives."

See an interesting account of him and of the family and their
curious monuments in Thoroton's Antiquities of Nottinghamshire, p.
53, &c.; see also Wotton's Baronetage, i. 34.

ARMS.--_Sable, semee of cinquefoils, and a lion rampant argent,
armed and langued gules_. This coat reversed was borne by Monsieur
John de Clyfton, in the reign of Richard II. (Roll of the date.)

Present Representative, Sir Robert Juckes Clifton, 9th Baronet.




SUTTON OF NORWOOD, BARONET 1772.


[Illustration] Sutton-upon-Trent gave name to this ancient family,
the first upon record being Roland, son of Hervey, who lived in the
reign of Henry III., and married Alice, daughter and coheiress of
Richard de Lexington. From this match came the manor of Averham or
Egram in this county, which long continued the seat and residence of
the Suttons, who were represented in the days of Queen Elizabeth by
Sir William Sutton, whom her Majesty coupled, not in the most
complimentary manner, with three other eminent Nottinghamshire
knights in the following distich:--

  "Gervase the gentle,* Stanhope the stout,
   Markham the lion, and _Sutton the lout_."

In 1646, Robert Sutton, the head of this family, was raised to the
Peerage as Baron Lexington, extinct 1723, who is represented in the
female line by Viscount Canterbury. The present family descend from
Henry, younger brother of the first Lord Lexington.

See Thoroton's Nottinghamshire, pp. 327, 359; and Courthope's
Debrett's Baronetage, p. 195.

ARMS.--_Argent, a canton sable_.

Present Representative, Sir John Sutton, 3rd Baronet.

  * _i.e._ Sir Gervase Clifton.




STANHOPE OF SHELFORD, EARL OF CHESTERFIELD 1628.


[Illustration] Stanhope, in the wapentake of Darlington in the
bishoprick of Durham, gave name to this knightly family, of whom the
first recorded ancestor is Walter de Stanhope, whose son Richard
died at Stanhope, in 1338 or 1339. In the reign of Edward III. we
find Sir Richard Stanhope, grandson of Walter, Mayor of
Newcastle-on-Tyne. Hampton and other manors in this county came by
marriage with the heiress of Maulovel about 1370; but on the death
of Richard Stanhope in 1529, these estates went to his only daughter
and heiress, who became the wife of John Babington. The monastery of
Shelford was soon after this period granted to Sir Michael Stanhope
(in the 31st of Henry VIII).

Younger Branches. 1. Stanhope of Holme-Lacy, Baronet 1807, descended
from the youngest brother of the great-grandfather of the present
Earl. 2. Stanhope Earl Stanhope 1718, descended from the eldest son
of the second marriage of the first Earl of Chesterfield. 3.
Stanhope Earl of Harrington 1742, descended from Sir John Stanhope,
younger brother by the half-blood of the first Earl of Chesterfield.

See Lord Mahon's (now Earl Stanhope) Notices of the Stanhopes. 8vo.,
1855; Thoroton's Nottinghamshire, 147; Surtees's Durham, ii. 46; and
Brydges's Collins, iii. 407, iv. 171, and 284.

ARMS.--_Quarterly ermine and gules_. And so borne in the reign of
Edward III., but after the match with Maulovel, who brought into the
family the estate and seat of Rampton from the heiress of
Longvillers, the arms of that family, viz. _Sable, a bend between
six cross-crosslets argent_, were assumed; on losing that
great estate, Sir Michael Stanhope resumed the more ancient coat in
the reign of Henry VIII.

Present Representative, George Stanhope, 6th Earl of Chesterfield.




WILLOUGHBY OF WOLLATON, BARON MIDDLETON 1711.


[Illustration] This is a younger and now the only remaining male
branch of the great Lincolnshire family of Willoughby, descended
from Sir Thomas Willoughby, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas
in the reign of Henry VIII., youngest son of Sir Christopher
Willoughby of Eresby, who was sprung from Sir William Willoughby of
Willoughby in Lincolnshire, and lord of that manor in the reign of
Edward I. Wollaton was inherited from the heiress of Willoughby (of
another family) in the thirty-eighth year of Queen Elizabeth.

See Brydges's Collins, vi. 591, vii. 215; and for the
Nottinghamshire family, see Thoroton, p. 221; and for the tombs of
this ancient house, pp. 36, 223, 227; see also Dugdale's
Warwickshire, 2nd ed. vol. ii. p. 1052.

ARMS.--_Or, fretty azure_. And so borne by Robert de Willoughby in
1300, as appears by the Roll of Carlaverock; but after the death of
Bishop Bek, his maternal uncle, in the 4th of Edward II. he adopted
the coat of Bek, _Gules, a mill-rind argent_. See Nicolas's Roll of
Carlaverock, p, 328.

Willoughby of Wollaton and of Middleton in the county of Warwick
bore, _Or, two bars gules, the upper charged with two waterbougets,
the lower with one waterbouget, argent_.

Present Representative, Henry Willoughby, 8th Baron Middleton.




CLINTON OF CLUMBER, DUKE OF NEWCASTLE 1756.


[Illustration] The Clintons are traced to the reign of Henry I.,
when, by favour of that king, Geffery de Clinton "was raised from
the dust," as a contemporary writer affirms, and made Justice of
England. He was enriched by large grants of land from the crown, and
built the castle of Kenilworth. The present family descend from the
brother of this Geffery, whose issue were of Coleshill and Maxtoke
in Warwickshire, of which latter place John de Clinton was created
Baron in 1298. His descendant, Edward Lord Clinton, was advanced to
the Earldom of Lincoln in 1572. No family was more nobly allied, few
had broader possessions--all have been long dissipated; but a
fortunate match with the eventual heiress of Pelham in 1717 revived
the drooping fortunes of the Clintons; hence the estate of Clumber,
the former seat of the Holles family, and the Dukedom of Newcastle.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, 2nd ed. vol. ii. pp. 992, 1007; and
Brydges's Collins, ii. 181.

ARMS.--_Argent, three cross crosslets fitchée sable, on a chief
azure two mullets pierced of the first_. The original arms, as borne
by Thomas de Clinton in the reign of Henry III., appears to have
been _a plain chief_. See his seal engraved in Upton, de Studio
Militari, p. 82. In the reign of Edward II. Sir John Clinton of
Maxtoke bore, _Argent, on a chief azure two mullets or_. At the same
period another Sir John Clinton bore, _Or, three piles azure, a
canton ermine_. His son in the fifth of Edward III. bore, _Argent,
on a chief azure two fleurs-de-lis or_. William Clinton, Earl of
Huntingdon, at the same period bore the present coat with the
exception of _three mullets or_ in place of the _two mullets
argent_, and John Clinton omitted the crosslets. William Clinton,
Lord of Allesley, who lived at the same period, bore the present
coat. John de Clinton in the succeeding reign, bore _two
mullets of six points or pierced gules_, and Thomas de Clynton the
same with _a label of three points ermine_.

See Willement's and Nicolas's Rolls, and Montagu's Guide to the
Study of Heraldry, p. 51.

Present Representative, Henry Pelham Alexander Pelham-Clinton, 6th
Duke of Newcastle.




+Gentle.+


EYRE OF HAMPTON.


[Illustration] The Eyres appear as witnesses to charters in the Peak
of Derbyshire in the remotest period to which private charters
ascend. The first of the name known is William le Eyre, of Hope, in
the reign of Henry III. In the reign of Henry V. the family divided
into three great branches: the present house descends from Eyre of
Laughton in South Yorkshire, who spring from Eyre of Home Hall near
Chesterfield. One moiety of Rampton was purchased by Anthony Eyre in
the reign of Elizabeth; the other came from the coheiress of
Babington, in 1624.

See Hunter's South Yorkshire, i. 288; see also Lysons's Derbyshire,
lxxxiii., for a note on the various branches of Eyre, and Gent. Mag.
1795, pp. 121, 212.

Extinct Branches. 1. Eyre of Highlow, who adopted the names of
Archer, Newton, and Gell. 2. Eyre of Normanton-upon-Soar. 3. Eyre
Earl of Newburgh.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a chevron sable three quatrefoils or_.

Present Representative, the Rev. Charles Wasteneys Eyre.




OXFORDSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


STONOR OF STONOR, BARON CAMOYS 1383, RESTORED 1839.


[Illustration] "Stonor is a 3 miles out of Henley. Ther is a fayre
parke and a warren of connies and fayre woods. The mansion place
standithe clyminge on a hille, and hathe 2 courtes buyldyd withe
tymbar, brike, and flynte; Sir Walter Stonor, now possessor of it,
hathe augmentyd and strengthed the howse. The Stonors hathe longe
had it in possessyon syns one Fortescue invadyd it by mariage of an
heire generall of the Stonors, but after dispocessed." Thus wrote
Leland in his Itinerary, (vii. fo. 62a.): to which it may be added
that the family has the reputation of being very ancient, and may
certainly be traced to the twelfth century as resident at Stonor. In
the reigns of Edward II. and III., Sir John Stonor, Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, (whose tomb is preserved in the chancel of
Dorchester church in this county,) was the representative and great
advancer of the family.

See Magna Britannia, iv. 425; and the first edition of Burke's
Commoners, ii. 440; see also Excerpta Historica, p. 353, for some
curious letters of the Stonors of the time of Edward IV.

ARMS.--_Azure, two bars dancetté or, a chief argent_. Monsieur John
de Stonor bore, _Azure, a fess dancetté and chief or_, in the reign
of Edward III. (Roll.)

Present Representative, Thomas Stonor, 3rd Baron Camoys.




WYKEHAM OF TYTHROP.


[Illustration] This ancient family is traced to the commencement of
the fourteenth century, when Robert Wykeham was Lord of Swalcliffe,
the original seat of the Wykehams in this county, and possessed by
the late W. H. Wykeham, Esq., who died in 1800, and still, I
believe, belonging to his daughter the Baroness Wenman. Tythrop came
from the Herberts by will to the late P. P. Wykeham, Esq. uncle of
Lady Wenman.

The relationship of the great William of Wykeham, Bishop of
Winchester, with this family is a disputed point, for which see
Collectanea Topographica et Genealogica, ii. 225, 368, iii. 178,
245; see also the Topographer and Genealogist, iii. 49, for a very
interesting paper on this subject by C. Wykeham Martin, Esq., M.P.

Younger Branch. Wykeham Martin, of Leeds Castle, Kent.

ARMS.--Allowed by Robert Cooke, Clarencieux, in 1571.--_Argent, two
chevronels sable between three roses gules, barbed and seeded
proper_. This coat was borne by the great Bishop, though when he was
Archdeacon of Lincoln he bore but _one chevron_ between the roses.
But the herald Glover attributed a variation of the arms of
Chamberlaine, derived from the Counts of Tankerville, to Wykeham of
Swalcliffe, viz: _Ermine, on a bordure gules six mullets or_.

Present Representative, Philip Thomas Herbert Wykeham, Esq.




CROKE OF STUDLEY, ANCIENTLY BLOUNT.


[Illustration] This is the eldest branch of the great family of
Blount or le Blond, whose origin has been traced by the late Sir
Alexander Croke to the Counts of Guisnes before the Norman Conquest.
Robert le Blount, whose name is found recorded in Domesday, was a
considerable landholder in Suffolk, Ixworth in that county being the
seat of his Barony. Belton in Rutlandshire was afterwards inherited
by his descendants from the Odinsels, and Hampton-Lovet, in the
county of Worcester, from the Lovet family. In 1404, Nicholas le
Blount, who had been deeply engaged in the conspiracy to restore
Richard II. to his throne, changed his name to Croke, on his return
to England, in order to avoid the revenge of Henry IV. The Crokes
afterwards became a legal family, and seated themselves at Chilton
in Buckinghamshire. The priory of Studley was purchased from Henry
VIII. by John Croke, in 1539.

Younger Branches. Blount of Sodington, in the county of Worcester,
and of Mawley Hall in Shropshire, descended from William, second son
of Sir Robert le Blount, who died in 1288, and the heiress of
Odinsels. The Blounts of Maple-Durham in this county, and the
extinct Lords Mountjoy, are of a still junior line to the house
of Sodington. The other extinct branches are too numerous to
mention.

See Croke's Genealogy of the Croke Family, 4to. 1823, and "The
Scrope and Grosvenor Roll," vol. ii. p. 192, for a memoir of Sir
Walter Blount, who fell at the battle of Shrewsbury together with
Sir Hugh Shirley and two other knights in the royal coat-armour of
Henry the Fourth--

  "semblably furnished like the King himself."

ARMS.--For Blount. _Barry nebulée of six or and sable_. For Croke,
_Gules, a fess between six martlets argent_. The more ancient coat
was, _Lozengy or and sable_, which was borne by William le Blount in
the reign of Henry III. Sir William le Blount of Warwickshire, (so
called because he held under the Earl of Warwick,) bore the present
_nebulée_ coat in the reign of Edward II. Sir Thomas le Blount at
the same period _the fess between three martlets_, now called the
coat of Croke. (Rolls of the dates.)

Present Representative, George Croke, Esq.




ASHURST OF WATERSTOCK.


[Illustration] A Lancashire family of good antiquity, and until the
middle of the last century lords of Ashurst in that county, where
they appear to have been seated not long after the Conquest. In the
reign of James II. the eldest son of a younger brother was created a
Baronet, of Waterstock in this county. His daughter and eventual
heiress married Sir Richard Allin, Baronet, whose daughter, marrying
Mr. Ashurst of Ashurst, great-grandfather of the present
representative of the family, brought the estate of Waterstock into
the elder line of the Ashursts.

See Burke's Extinct and Dormant Baronetage, and his Landed Gentry.

ARMS.--_Gules, a cross between four fleurs-de-lis argent_. The
Baronet family bore the _cross engrailed or, and but one
fleur-de-lis of the same_.

Present Representative, John Henry Ashurst, Esq.




ANNESLEY OF BLETCHINGDON, VISCOUNT VALENTIA IN IRELAND 1621.


[Illustration] Ralph, surnamed Brito de Annesley, living in the
second year of Henry II. (1156,) is assumed to have been son of
Richard, of Annesley, in the county of Nottingham, mentioned in the
Domesday Survey. That estate continued in the Annesleys till the
death of John de Annesley, Esq., in 1437, when it went by an heiress
to the Chaworths. The family then removed to Rodington in the same
county, and afterwards to Newport-Pagnell in Buckinghamshire; but
Ireland was the scene of the prosperity of the family, early in the
seventeenth century, which may be said to have been re-founded by
Sir Francis Annesley, Secretary of State in 1616. Hence the
Viscountcy of Valentia, which afterwards merged in the Earldom of
Anglesey in England, adjudged by the English House of Lords to be
extinct in 1761; but by the same evidence the Viscountcy of Valentia
was allowed to the grandson of the last Earl of Anglesey, whom the
English House of Lords found to be illegitimate. He was created Earl
of Mountnorris in Ireland in 1793, and on the decease of the last
Earl in 1844, the Irish Viscountcy and the representation of
the family descended to Arthur Annesley of Bletchingdon, Esq.,
descended from the second marriage of the first Viscount Valentia.

Younger Branches. 1. Annesley of Clifford Chambers, co. Gloucester.
2. The Earl of Annesley in Ireland, 1789.

See Baker's Northamptonshire, i. 502; Thoroton's Nottinghamshire, p.
251; Archdall's Lodge, iv. 99; and the Tyndale Genealogy, privately
printed, folio, 1843.

ARMS.--_Paly of six argent and azure, a bend gules_. Monsieur de
Annesley bore, _Paly of six argent and gules, a bend vairy argent
and sable_, in the reign of Edward III. The present coat was borne
by John de Annesley in the reign of Richard II. (Rolls.)

Present Representative, Arthur Annesley, 11th Viscount Valentia.




VILLIERS OF MIDDLETON-STONEY, EARL OF JERSEY 1697.


[Illustration] The family of Villers or Villiers is ancient in
Leicestershire, Alexander de Villiers being lord of Brokesby in that
county early in the thirteenth century. The present coat of arms is
said to have been assumed in the reign of Edward I., as a badge of
Sir Richard de Villers' services in the crusades. "Villiers of
Brokesby" occurs among the gentlemen of Leicestershire, "that be
there most of reputation," in the Itinerary of Leland the antiquary
in the reign of Henry VIII. But the great rise of the family
was in the reign of James I., when the favourite Sir George Villiers
became Duke of Buckingham in 1623, extinct 1687. The Earls of Jersey
are sprung from the second but elder brother of the first duke.
Their connection with Oxfordshire appears not to have been before
the middle of the last century. Brokesby was sold by Sir William
Villiers, who died s. p. 1711.

Younger Branch. The Earl of Clarendon (1776), descended from the
second son of the second Earl of Jersey.

Extinct branch. The Earl of Grandison in Ireland, 1721; extinct
1766; descended from the elder brother of Sir Edward Villiers, who
died 1689, ancestor of the Earl of Jersey.

See Leland's Itinerary, i. fol. 23, and vi. fol. 65; Nichols's
Leicestershire, iii. pt. i. p. 197; and Brydges's Collins, iii. 762.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a cross gules five escallops or_. The ancient
arms founded on those of the Bellemonts Earls of Leicester were
_Sable, three cinquefoils argent_.

Present Representative, Victor Albert George Villiers, 7th Earl of
Jersey.




+Gentle.+


COKER OF BICESTER.


[Illustration] The younger, but I believe now the only remaining,
line of a family formerly seated at Coker in the county of Somerset,
where it can be traced to the time of Edward I. Mapouder in
Dorsetshire, derived from the heiress of Veale in the reign of Henry
V., became afterwards the family seat. In 1554, John Coker, who
appears to have been second son of Thomas Coker, of Mapouder,
purchased the Manor of "Nuns' Place or King's End in Biscester,"
which has since remained the residence of this ancient family.

See Coker's Survey of Dorsetshire, p. 98; Hutchins's History of
Dorsetshire, vol. iii. p. 273; Kennett's Parochial Antiquities, 1st.
ed. p. 109; and Burke's Commoners, 2nd ed. vol. iii. p. 347.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend gules three leopard's heads or_. The
Mapouder line bore the arms within a border engrailed sable; but the
elder branch of the family, who are represented by the Seymours
Dukes of Somerset, omitted the border.

Present Representative, Lewis Coker, Esq.




PARKER OF SHIRBURN CASTLE, EARL OF MACCLESFIELD 1721, BARON PARKER
1716.


[Illustration] By the decease of the late Thomas Hawe Parker, Esq.,
of Park Hall, in the county of Stafford, the representation of the
family has devolved upon the Earl of Macclesfield, who represents
the junior line. The Parkers were established at Park Hall, in the
parish of Caverswall, in the seventeenth century, having been
previously seated at Parwich, and before that at Norton-Lees, in the
county of Derby. The first recorded ancestor, Thomas Parker, was of
Bulwell, in Nottinghamshire, in the reign of Richard II. He married
the heiress of Gotham, and from hence, says Lysons, the seat of
Norton-Lees.

See Lysons's Derbyshire, p. cxxxviii.; Brydges's Collins, iv, 190;
and Ward's Stoke-upon-Trent, p. 561.

ARMS.--_Gules, a chevron between three leopard's heads or_.

Present Representative, Thomas Augustus Wolstenholme Parker, 6th
Earl of Macclesfield.




RUTLANDSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


WINGFIELD OF TICKENCOTE.


[Illustration] The Wingfields of Wingfield and Letheringham, both in
Suffolk, a distinguished family of the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries, are traced nearly to the Conquest, though they do not
appear to have been lords of the manor or castle of Wingfield before
the reign of Edward II. The elder branch of this family is
represented by the Viscount Powerscourt in Ireland, descended from
Lewis the ninth son of Sir John Wingfield of Letheringham. The
present family is sprung from Henry, a younger brother of this Sir
John, who died in 1481. Tickencote was acquired by marriage in the
reign of Elizabeth with the heiress of Gresham.

Younger Branch. Wingfield of Onslow in Shropshire, according to the
Visitation of that county, descended from Anthony Wingfield of
Glossop, co. Derby, younger son of Sir Robert Wingfield of
Letheringham, who died in 1431.

See the elaborate dissertation on the House of Wingfield in the
second volume of Anstis's Register of the Order of the Garter;
see also Blakeway's Sheriffs of Shropshire, pp. 147, 150;
Camden's Visitation of the county of Huntingdon, 1613, (printed by
the Camden Society,) p. 125, &c.; and Blore's Rutlandshire, (fo.
1811,) for full pedigrees of the different branches formerly seated
at Crowfield and Dunham-Magna, co. Norfolk; Kimbolton Castle, co.
Huntingdon; Letheringham and Brantham, co. Suffolk; and Upton, co.
Northampton, p. 65-70. For Viscount Powerscourt, see Archdall's
Lodge, v. 255.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend gules cotised sable three pair of wings
conjoined of the field_. In the reign of Richard II. Monsieur
William Wyngefeld bore, _Gules, two wings conjoined in lure argent_.
(Roll.)

Present Representative, John Muxloe Wingfield, Esq.




SHROPSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


CORBET OF MORETON-CORBET, BARONET 1808.


[Illustration] Pre-eminent among the ancient aristocracy of
Shropshire is the House of Corbet, descended from "Roger, son of
Corbet," so called in the Domesday Survey. In the twelfth century
the Corbets divided into two branches; the elder was seated at
Wattlesborough, the younger at Caus-Castle. In the time of Henry
III. the former became of Moreton-Corbet, derived from the heiress
of the Anglo-Saxon family of Toret; but the Caus-Castle line was by
far the most eminent, and became barons of the realm. In the reign
of Richard II. several of the most ancient of the Corbet estates
were lost by an heiress; and this happened again in 1583, when the
lands brought into the family by the heiress of Hopton went by
marriage to the Wallops and Careys. Moreton-Corbet remained till
1688, when it also descended to the sister of Sir Vincent Corbet;
but the male line was still preserved by the Corbets of Shrewsbury,
and the ancient estate of Moreton-Corbet re-purchased about 1743.

Younger Branch. Corbett of Elsham (co. Lincoln) and of Darnhall
(co. Chester,) descended from Robert second son of Sir Vincent
Corbet, of Moreton-Corbet, who died in 1622.

Extinct Branches. 1. Corbet of Stoke and Adderley in this county,
Baronet 1627, sprung from Reginald third son of Sir Robert Corbet of
Moreton-Corbet; extinct 1780. 2. Corbet of Hadley in this county,
descended from the second marriage of Sir Roger Corbet of
Wattlesborough, who died temp. King John. The heiress married John
Greville, in the 7th Henry V. 3. Corbet of Longnor in this county,
and of Leighton, co. Montgomery, Baronet 1642, descended also from
John third son of Peter Corbet, Baron of Caus, and Alice Orreby;
extinct 1814. 4. Corbet of Sundorne, formerley of Leigh in this
county, descended from John third son of Peter Corbet, Baron of
Caus, and of Alice his wife, daughter of Sir Fulke de Orreby;
extinct 1859.

See Blakeway's Sheriffs of Shropshire, fol. Shrewsbury, 1831, pp.
37, 63, 65, 230, &c., corrected by the MSS. of the late Mr. Joseph
Morris of Shrewsbury;* see also Eyton's Antiquities of Shropshire,
vol. vii. p. 5; and Gent. Mag. for 1809, pp. 599, 903.

ARMS.--_Or, a raven proper_. The present coat, "_Or, un corbyn de
sable_," was borne by Sir Peter Corbet in the reign of Edward II.;
but Thomas Corbet, in that of Henry III., bore "_Or,_ 2 _corbeaux
sable_," which, with the addition of a bordure engrailed sable, is
the coat of the Corbets of Sundorne. _Or, three ravens in pale
proper_, was borne by Corbet of Hadley, and was so borne by Sir
Thomas Corbet in the reign of Edward II. (Rolls.)

Present Representative, Sir Vincent Rowland Corbet, 3rd Baronet.

  * In future quoted as "Morris MSS."




LEIGHTON OF LOTON, BARONET 1692-3.


[Illustration] The Leightons are stated to have been seated at
Leighton in this county prior to the Conquest: Domesday has "Rainald
(vicecom') ten' _Lestone_; Leuui tenuit temp. Reg. Edw." Hence there
can be no doubt the name Lestone, _i.e._ Lewi's-town, now Leighton,
was derived. Certain it is that the direct ancestors of the family
of Leighton were resident there at the very commencement of the
twelfth century. From Rainald the sheriff, who was the superior lord
of Leighton when Domesday was compiled, that and all his other
manors passed in marriage with his daughter to Alan, the ancestor of
the Fitz-Alan family; and in the _Liber Niger_, under the year 1167,
Richard son of Tiel (Tihel) is stated to hold Leighton under William
Fitz-Alan by the service of one knight. This Richard was the
undoubted ancestor of this ancient family. Leighton is now severed
from the inheritance of the male line of the Leightons, belonging to
Robert Gardner, Esq., whose wife was the heiress of the Kinnersleys,
descended in the female line from the second marriage of Sir Thomas
Leighton, knighted in 1513. Church Stretton, acquired by the heiress
of Cambray in the fifteenth century, was for four generations the
family seat. Loton (an ancient Corbet estate) was acquired by
marriage with a coheiress of Burgh, by John Leighton, Sheriff of
Shropshire in 1468.

See Eyton's Shropshire, vii. p. 325; Wotton's Baronetage, iv. 38;
Blakeway, pp. 74, 75, 80, 91; Stemmata Botvilliana, 1858; and Morris
MSS.

ARMS.--_Quarterly per fess indented or and gules_. In 1315, Sir
Richard de Leighton bore the present coat differenced by a bendlet,
as appears by his seal attached to a deed still preserved at Loton:
the same arms are on his monument, formerly in Buildwas Abbey, and
now in Leighton church.

Present Representative, Sir Baldwin Leighton, 7th Baronet, late M.P.
for South Salop.




SANDFORD OF SANDFORD.


[Illustration] A family of acknowledged antiquity, whose ancestor
Richard de Sanford was certainly seated at Sandford soon after the
Conquest, and which has ever since remained their principal seat; it
is in the parish of Prees, and is mentioned by Leland in his
Itinerary. The Herald of the eighteenth century, and the late
excellent Bishop of Edinburgh, were both of this family.

Younger Branch. Sandford of the Isle House near Shrewsbury, parted
from the parent stem in the fifteenth century, and who also by
marriage represent the ancient Shropshire families of Sprenghose and
Winsbury.

See Eyton's Shropshire, ix. p. 221; and Blakeway, pp. 54, 190, 222.

ARMS.--_Quarterly per fess indented azure and ermine_. The Sandfords
of the Isle bear, _Party per chevron sable and ermine, in chief two
boar's heads couped close or_.

Present Representative, Thomas Hugh Sandford, Esq.




KYNASTON OF HARDWICKE, BARONET 1818.


[Illustration] The Kynastons are lineal descendants of the ancient
British Princes of Powys, sprung from Griffith, son of Iorwerth
Goch, who took refuge in this county; where, as it is stated in the
Testa de Nevill, King Henry II. gave him the manors of Rowton and
Ellardine, in the parish of High Ercall, and Sutton and Brocton in
the parish of Sutton, to be held in capite by the service of being
_latimer_ (_i.e._ interpreter) between the English and Welsh. He
married Matilda, younger sister and coheir of Ralph le Strange, and
in her right became possessed of the manor of Kinnerley and other
estates in Shropshire. Madoc, the eldest son of Griffith, seated
himself at Sutton, from him called to this day "Sutton Madoc;"
Griffith Vychan, the younger son, had Kinnerley, a portion of his
mother's inheritance, and in that manor he resided at Tre-gynvarth,
_Anglicè_ Kynvarth's Town, usually written and spoken as _Kynaston_;
and hence the name of the family. Griffith or Griffin de Kyneveston,
son of Griffith Vychan, was witness to a grant of land to the abbey
of Haghmond in 1313. His lineal descendant Roger Kynaston fought at
Blore Heathe in 1459, and Lord Audley the Lancastrian General is
supposed to have fallen by his hand; hence the second quarter in the
arms, and for this and other services he received the honour of
knighthood. The Kynastons, from the place so called, went to
Hordley, and latterly in the seventeenth century removed to
Hardwicke.

The Kynastons of Oteley, extinct early in the eighteenth century,
were an elder branch; they acquired Oteley by the marriage of an
heiress of that ancient house in the reign of Henry VII., and were
descended from John, elder brother of Sir Roger Kynaston before
mentioned.

See Blakeway, p. 73; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Quarterly_, 1 _and_ 4, _Argent, a lion rampant sable_; 2
_and_ 3, _Ermine, a chevron gules_. Sir John de Kynastone in the
reign of Edward II. bore, _Sable, a lion rampant queve forchée or_.
(Roll.)

Present Representative, Sir John Roger Kynaston, 3rd Baronet.




CORNEWALL OF DELBURY.


[Illustration] This is the only remaining branch of the once
powerful family of Cornewall, for so many ages Barons of Burford,
(though without a summons to parliament,) descended from Richard,
natural son of Richard Earl of Cornwall, King of the Romans, and
second son of John King of England: (an illegitimacy however which
was denied at the Heralds' Visitation of this county in 1623, by Sir
Thomas Cornewall, of Burford, who stated that the said Richard was
the legitimate son of Richard Plantagenet, Earl of Cornwall, by
Sanchia of Provence, his second wife). The Barony of Burford came
into the Cornewall family before he ninth of Edward II. with the
coheiress of Mortimer, and continued with the descendants till
the death of Francis, Baron of Burford, in 1726. The present
family is sprung from a younger line, seated at Berrington in the
county of Hereford, in the fifteenth century, and which estate was
sold in the eighteenth. Delbury was purchased by and became the seat
of Frederick Cornewall, Esq. who died in 1788, and was father of the
late Bishop of Worcester.

See Blakeway, pp. 72, 83, 92; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Ermine, a lion rampant gules crowned or within a bordure
engrailed sable bezantee_. "Jeffery de Cornewall" and "Symon de
Cornewall" bore, _Argent, a lion rampant gules crowned or, with a
baston sable, the first charged with three mullets or, the second
with three bezants_. (Roll of the reign of Edward III.) The present
coat was borne by Monsieur Bryan Cornewall, in the reign of Richard
II. (Roll.)

Present Representative, Herbert Cornewall, Esq.




LINGEN (CALLED BURTON) OF LONGNOR.


[Illustration] The first recorded ancestor of this loyal family is
Ralph de Wigmore, lord of Lingen, in the county of Hereford, founder
of the Priory of Lyngbroke. His son and grandson John took the name
of Lingen: the latter is recorded in the Testa de Nevill as holding
various estates in Herefordshire, "of the old feoffment," that is,
by descent from the time of King Henry I. His lineal descendant, Sir
John Lingen, of Lingen and Sutton, in the county of Hereford, having
married in the reign of Edward IV. the daughter and coheiress
of Sir John Burgh, succeeded to considerable estates in Shropshire,
and to the manor of Radbrook, in the county of Gloucester, until
recently the inheritance of his descendants. Longnor, the ancient
seat of the Burtons, came into the family in 1722, by the marriage
of Thomas Lingen, Esq. of Radbrook, with Anne, only daughter of
Robert Burton, Esq. and sister and heir of Thomas Burton, of
Longnor, Esq. Their son assumed the name of Burton by Act of
Parliament in 1748.

From Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Barry of six or and azure, on a bend gules three roses
argent_.

Present Representative, Robert Burton, Esq.




HARLEY OF DOWN-ROSSAL.


[Illustration] The origin of this knightly family has been recently
explored by Mr. Eyton in his Antiquities of Shropshire, and from
that valuable authority it appears that Edward and Hernulf, living
in the first half of the twelfth century, were lords of Harley, and
the ancestors of the race who were afterwards denominated therefrom.
Sixth in descent from William de Harley living in 1231 was Sir
Robert de Harley, who having married the coheiress of Brampton
Bryan, in the county of Hereford, that place became the residence of
his descendants, sprung from Sir Bryan his second son. The
Shropshire estates went to the elder son, and passed through
heiresses first to the Peshalls, and thence to the Lacons. Fifth
in descent from Sir Bryan de Harley was John Harley, Esq. who
signalised himself at Flodden Field in 1513. His eldest son was
ancestor of the Earls of Oxford (1711,) extinct 1853. The present
family, who now represent this ancient lineage, are descended from
William third son of the above mentioned John. He died in 1600,
having seated himself at Beckjay, in this county. The family
afterwards became citizens of Shrewsbury, and acquired Down-Rossal,
the present seat, in 1852.

See Eyton's Antiquities of Shropshire, vol. vi. p. 230; Collins's
Noble Families, p. 184; Brydges's Collins, vol. iv. p. 37; and
Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Or, a bend cotised sable_, and which was borne by Sir
Richard de Harlee in the reign of Edward II. (Roll.)

Present Representative, John Harley, Esq.




TYRWHITT, OF STANLEY-HALL, BARONET 1808.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of an ancient Lincolnshire
family, according to Wotton, to be traced to Sir Hercules Tyrwhitt,
living in the tenth of Henry I., and raised to eminence by Sir
Robert Tyrwhitt, Justice of the Common Pleas and King's Bench in the
reign of Henry IV. He was seated at Kettleby, in that county, which
remained the residence of the elder branch, created Baronets in
1611, until its extinction in 1673. A younger son was of Scotter, in
the same county, the ancestor of the present family, of whom John,
fifth son of the Rev. Robert Tyrwhitt, married a descendant of the
Jones's of Shrewsbury, and by her acquired the Stanley-Hall estate,
and took the name of Jones, but the present Baronet has since
resumed the ancient name of Tyrwhitt.

See Blakeway, p. 240; Wotton's Baronetage, i. 178; Camden's Remains,
p. 151; Baker's Northamptonshire, i. 115 and "Notices and Remains of
the Family of Tyrwhitt," &c. "printed not published." 8vo. n.d. [By
R. P. Tyrwhitt, Esq. of the Middle Temple, eldest son of Richard
Tyrwhitt, late of Nantyr Hall in Denbighshire, Esq. younger brother
of the first Baronet.]

ARMS.--_Gules, three tyrwhitts or_.

Present Representative, Sir Henry Thomas Tyrwhitt, third
Baronet.




+Gentle.+


GATACRE OF GATACRE.


[Illustration] A family of great antiquity, and which is said to
have been established at Gatacre by a grant from Edward the
Confessor. The pedigree, however, is not traced beyond the reign of
Henry III.

Although very ancient, this family does not appear to have been
distinguished except by "The fair maid of Gatacre," (see Blakeway,
p. 169,) and by the eminent divine of this house noticed in
"Fuller's Worthies," and who was the ancestor of the Gatacres of
Mildenhall, in Suffolk.

See Leland's Itinerary, v. p. 31; Eyton's Antiquities of Shropshire,
vol. iii. p. 86; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Quarterly gules and ermine, on the second and third quarters
three piles of the first, on a fess azure five bezants_. This coat,
a remarkable exception to the simple heraldry of the period, is
supposed to have been granted to Humphry Gatacre, Esquire of the
Body to King Henry VI. The following coat, ascribed to this family,
was about the end of the seventeenth century in the church of
Claverley in this county: _Quarterly, first and fourth ermine, a
chief indented gules; second and third gules, over all on a fess
azure three bezants_. (Eyton's Shropshire, iii. p. 103.)

Present Representative, Edward Lloyd Gatacre, Esq.




EYTON OF EYTON.


[Illustration] This family can also lay claim to great antiquity,
being certainly resident at Eyton on the Wealdmoors as early as the
reigns of Henry I. and II. They were in some way connected with the
Pantulfs, Barons of Wem, who were Lords of Eyton at the period of
the Domesday Survey, and, in consequence of this connection, not
only quarter their arms, but were among the very few Shropshire
gentry who were not dispossessed after the Rebellion of the third
Norman Earl of Shrewsbury, in the time of Henry I.

Robert de Eyton stands at the head of the pedigree.

See Blakeway, pp. 56, 70, 71; Eyton's Shropshire, viii. p. 26; and
Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Quarterly, first and fourth, or, a fret azure; second and
third, gules two bars ermine_.

Present Representative, Thomas Campbell Eyton, Esq.




PLOWDEN OF PLOWDEN.


[Illustration] When the ancestors of this family were first seated
at Plowden is a matter of doubt, but it was at a very early period.
In 1194 Roger de Plowden is said to have been at the siege of Acre
with Richard I., and there to have acquired the fleurs-de-lis in the
arms. The name occurs upon all the county records from the reign of
Henry III. Edmund Plowden the lawyer, in the sixteenth century, was
the great luminary of this family.

See Baker's Northamptonshire, i. 470; Blakeway, pp. 132, 222, and
Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Azure, a fess dancettée, the two upper points terminating in
fleurs-de-lis or_.

Present Representative, William Henry Francis Plowden, Esq.




ACTON OF ALDENHAM, BARONET 1643-4.


[Illustration] Engelard de Acton, of Acton-Pigot and Acton-Burnell,
was admitted on the Roll of Guild Merchants of Shrewsbury in 1209.
His descendant Edward de Acton, of Aldenham, married the coheiress
of Le'Strange, living in 1387, and with her acquired an estate in
Longnor, in this county. The baronetcy was the reward of loyalty in
the beginning of the great rebellion.

General Acton, Prime Minister to the King of Naples for twenty-nine
years, commencing in 1778, was a distinguished member of this
family.

See Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 398; Blakeway, pp. 54, 174.

ARMS.--_Gules, crusilly or, two lions passant in pale argent_. This
coat is evidently founded on that of Le'Strange.

Present Representative, Sir John Emerick Edward Dalberg Acton, 8th
Baronet.




WHITMORE OF APLEY.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of an ancient family
formerly seated at Whittimere or Whitmore, in the parish of
Claverley, where it is traced to the reign of Henry III. The Apley
branch made a large fortune by mercantile transactions in London in
the reign of Elizabeth, and purchased that estate in 1572, from Sir
Thomas Lucy, Knight. The Whitmores have represented Bridgnorth in
Parliament constantly since the reign of Charles II. Blakeway
observes that this family does not appear to have had any connection
with the Whitmores of Cheshire, though the Heralds have given them
similar arms, with a crest allusive to the springing of a young
shoot out of an old stock.

Younger Branches. Whitmore of Dudmaston, in this county, and
Whitmore-Jones, of Chastleton, in the county of Oxford.

See Blakeway, p. 106, and Notes on the Whitmore Family, in Notes and
Queries, 3rd series, v. p. 159.

ARMS.--_Vert, fretty or_.

Present Representative, Thomas Charlton Whitmore, Esq.




WALCOT OF BITTERLEY.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Walcot in the parish of
Lydbury, which was held under the Bishop of Hereford by Roger de
Walcot in 1255. He was the ancestor of the present family. Sixth in
descent from Roger de Walcot was John Walcot, of whom the pedigree
relates, "that playing at Chess with King Henry V. he gave him the
check-mate with the rooke, whereupon the King changed his coat of
arms, which was the cross with fleurs-de-lis, and gave him the rooke
for a remembrance." Walcot was sold in the year 1764, and Bitterley,
which had belonged to the family in 1660, became the seat of the
Walcots, descended from Humphry Walcot, who died in 1616, and who
was the eldest son of John Walcot of Walcot. He had livery of the
manor of Walcot in 1611, "on the extinction (says Blakeway,) I
suppose of the elder line."

See Blakeway, p. 112; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three chess-rooks ermine_. The
former coat, _Argent, on a cross patonce azure five fleurs-de-lis
or_, was ascribed to John de Walcote in the Roll of the reign of
Richard II.

Present Representative, the Rev. Charles Walcot.




BALDWIN (CALLED CHILDE) OF KINLET.


[Illustration] This ancient family, which has been supposed to be of
Norman origin, was early seated at Diddlebury, (or Delbury,) in
Corvedale, which appears to have come from the heiress of Wigley.
Roger Baldwin of Diddlebury died anno 1398, and was the ancestor of
the family. Diddlebury was sold to the Cornewalls of Berrington in
the last century, when the Baldwins removed to Aqualate in
Staffordshire. Kinlet was the inheritance of the Childes, whose
coheiress married Charles Baldwin, Esq. The Childes derived it from
the Lacons, and the Lacons by inheritance from the Blounts of
Kinlet.

See Blakeway, p. 212.

ARMS.--_Argent, a saltire sable_.

Present Representative, Walter Lacon Childe, Esq.




DOD OF CLOVERLY.

[Illustration] A branch of the Dods of Edge in Cheshire, now extinct
in the male line, and one of the oldest families in England, which
can be traced in a direct line, undoubtedly of _Saxon_, if not of
_British_ descent, which, says Blakeway, "is in the highest degree
probable." The following is Ormerod's account of the origin of this
family. "About the time of Henry II., Hova, son of Cadwgan Dot,
married the daughter and heiress of the Lord of Edge, with whom he
had the fourth of that manor. It is probable that the Lord of Edge
was son of Edwin, who before the Conquest was sole proprietor of
eight manors; we may call him a Saxon thane. It appears by Domesday
that Dot was the Saxon lord of sixteen manors, from all of which he
was ejected; we may presume he was identical with Cadwgan Dot." "A
descent in the male line (adds Ormerod) from a Saxon noticed in
Domesday would be unique in this county" (Cheshire). The Dods of
Cloverley descend from Hugo, living in the fourteenth of Henry IV.,
who married the coheiress of Roger de Cloverley. He was the son of
John Dod of Farndon, who was son of Roger Dod of Edge, living in the
reign of Edward III., which John Dod had also acquired property in
Shropshire, by marriage with the coheiress of Warden of Ightfield.

See Ormerod's Cheshire, ii. 374; and Blakeway, p. 206.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess gules between two cotises wavy sable_. The
Dods of Edge bore three crescents or, on the fess, by which one
would imagine they were the younger rather than the elder line of
the family, and the present owner of Cloverly possesses deeds which
appear to prove that this was the fact.

Present Representative, John Whitehall Dod, Esq. late M.P. for North
Shropshire.




OAKELEY OF OAKELEY.


[Illustration] An ancient family, descended from Philip, who in the
reign of Henry III. was lord of Oakeley in the parish of Bishop's
Castle, from whence he assumed his name, and which has ever since
been the inheritance of his descendants.

Younger Branch. Sir Charles Oakeley, Baronet 1790.

See Blakeway, pp. 132, 173; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a fess between three crescents gules as many
fleurs-de-lis or_. These arms are, with those of the Plowdens and
other families of the vicinity, allusive to the services of
ancestors who fought under the banners of the great suzeraines of
their district, the Fitz-Alans, in the Crusades and the battlefields
of France.

Present Representative, the Rev. Arthur Oakeley.




HILL OF HAWKSTONE, VISCOUNT HILL 1842, BARONET 1726-7.

[Illustration] The first in the pedigree is Hugh de la Hulle, who
held the estate of Hulle, that is, Court of Hill, in the parish of
Burford, in this county, as the eleventh part of a knight's fee, of
the Barony of Stuteville, in the reigns of Richard I. and John, as
appears by the Testa de Neville. The family afterwards removed into
the north of the county, by marriages with the coheiresses of
Wlenkeslow, Buntingsdale, Styche, and Warren. The castle still borne
in the coat of Hill is found on the seal of William Hill in the
reign of Richard II. Court of Hill, the original seat of the Hills,
was bequeathed in the reign of Queen Elizabeth to the second son of
the eldest branch of the family, in whose line it continued till
carried by an heiress to the family of the present proprietor.
Hawkstone, the present seat, was settled upon Humphry Hill in 1560.
The great ornament of this family, and indeed he may be called the
founder of its modern consequence, was Richard Hill, Envoy
Extraordinary to the Italian States in the very beginning of the
eighteenth century.

See Blakeway, pp. 142, 179; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Ermine, on a fess sable a castle argent_.

Present Representative, Rowland Hill, second Viscount Hill.




FORESTER OF WILLEY, BARON FORESTER 1821.


[Illustration] This family is clearly descended from "Robert de
Wolint," (Wellington,) alias Forester, who is named in the Testa de
Neville as holding his estate by the serjeantry of keeping the royal
hay of Wellington in the forest of the Wrekin; and there is every
probability that he was the descendant of Ulger the Forester, chief
forester of all the king's forests in Shropshire in the time of
Stephen.

See Blakeway, p. 126; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Quarterly per fess dancettée argent and sable, on the first
and fourth quarters a bugle horn of the last, garnished or_.

Present Representative, John George Weld Forester, 2nd Baron
Forester.




EDWARDES, OF HARNAGE GRANGE AND SHREWSBURY, BARONET 1645.


[Illustration] Iddon, son of Rys Sais, a powerful British chieftain
in the Shropshire Marches at the period of the Norman Conquest, is
the ancestor of the family of Edwardes. His descendants were seated
at Kilhendre, in the parish of Ellesmere, in the reign of Henry I.,
an estate which continued in the family in the time of Queen
Elizabeth. The eminent services of Sir Thomas Edwardes of Shrewsbury
to King Charles I. were rewarded by the grant of a Baronetcy in
1645. The patent, however, was not taken out till the year 1678,
with a right of precedency before all baronets created after 1644.
The distinguished Major Herbert Edwardes, C.B., one of Her Majesty's
Commissioners for settling the affairs of the Punjaub, is of this
family.

See Blakeway, pp. 107, 121; Blakeway and Owen's Shrewsbury, ii. 259;
and Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 415; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Gules, a chevron engrailed between three heraldic tiger's
heads erased argent_.

Present Representative, Sir Henry Hope Edwardes, 10th Baronet.




BETTON (CALLED BRIGHT) OF TOTTERTON HALL.


[Illustration] Walter De Betton had a freehold estate at
Betton-Strange, near Shrewsbury, in the reign of Edward I. William
Betton, fourth in descent from Walter, was seated at Great Berwick
prior to the reign of Henry IV., and at his house the renowned
Hotspur lay during the night preceding the Battle of Shrewsbury.

The estate and mansion of Great Berwick continued with their lineal
descendants until sold in 1831, by Richard Betton, Esq. whose uncle
having succeeded to the estates of John Bright, Esq. assumed that
name, and was father of the present proprietor of Totterton Hall.

From the Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Argent, two pales sable, each charged with three
cross-crosslets fitchée or_.

Present Representative, the Rev. John Bright.




CLIVE (CALLED HERBERT) OF STYCHE, EARL OF POWIS 1804; BARON CLIVE IN
THE PEERAGE OF IRELAND 1762.


[Illustration] Although this family owe their elevation to the
military genius of the great Lord Clive, to whom the English nation
is so much indebted for its glory and power in the East, yet the
Clives have undoubted claims to antiquity both in Shropshire and
Cheshire, in which latter county, in the hundred of Northwich, is
Clive, from whence their ancestor Warin assumed his name in the time
of Henry III. About the reign of Edward II. the family removed to
Huxley, also in Cheshire, Henry de Clive having married the
coheiress; and again in the reign of Henry VI. on the marriage of
James Clive with the heiress of Styche, of Styche, they settled in
Shropshire at that place, which is in the parish of Moreton-Say, and
has remained uninterruptedly in the Clive family. The Earldom of
Powis is the result of the match with the heiress of Herbert, of
Powis Castle, in 1784.

See Ormerod's Cheshire, ii. 435, iii. 115; Blakeway, p. 140;
Brydges's Collins, v. 543; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a fess sable three mullets or_. In the fourth
year of Edward VI., three wolf's heads erased sable were added to
the field of the original coat. See Archdall's Lodge, vii. 80.

Present Representative, Edward James Herbert, 3rd Earl of
Powis.




LAWLEY OF SPOONBILL, BARON WENLOCK 1839; BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] This family is descended from Thomas Lawley, cousin
and next heir to John Lord Wenlock, K.G. in the reign of Edward IV.,
who was slain at the battle of Tewkesbury. The Lawleys were
described as "of Wenlock" in the reign of' Henry VI., and until that
of Henry VIII., when Richard Lawley, Esq. ancestor of Lord Wenlock,
was written "of Spoonhill."

See Blakeway, p. 92; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 261; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Argent, a cross formée, checky or and sable_.

Present Representative, Beilby Richard Lawley-Thompson, 2nd Baron
Wenlock.




PIGOTT OF EDGMOND.


[Illustration] The Pigotts were formerly seated at Chetwynd in this
county, which they inherited from the coheiress of Peshall in the
fourteenth century.

The family came originally from Cheshire; William Pigott of Butley
in the parish of Prestbury in that county, who died in 1376, was
grandfather of Richard Pigott of Butley who married the heiress of
Peshall. Chetwynd was sold about 1776, and the rectory of
Edgmond purchased by Thomas Pigott, Esq., in the reign of James I.

See Blakeway, p. 84; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Ermine, three fusils in fess sable_. The coat formerly borne
by this family, founded on the arms of Chetwynd, was, _Azure, a
chevron between three mullets or, on a chief ermine three fusils
sable_.

Present Representative, the Rev. John Dryden Pigott.




THORNES OF LLWYNTIDMAN HALL.


[Illustration] The name is local, from Thornes in the parish of
Shenstone, in the county of Stafford, where Robert, son of Roger de
la Thornes, was resident early in the fourteenth century. He was
elected burgess for Shrewsbury in 1357, a position subsequently
filled by several of his descendants. The family also became seated
at Shelvock in this county at an early period. Thomas Thornes of
that place erected a mansion on the old family estate at Thornes in
the reign of Edward IV., which estate was sold by his descendant
Roger Thornes in 1507. Shelvock continued in the family until the
extinction of the eldest branch of it in 1678. The present family
descend from Nicholas Thornes of Melverley, great-uncle of Richard
Thornes who was sheriff of this county in 1610.

See Sanders's History of Shenstone, p. 215; Blakeway, p. 101; and
Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Sable, a lion rampant guardant argent_.

Present Representative, Thomas William Thornes, Esq.




HARRIES OF CRUCKTON.


[Illustration] The ancestor of this family was of Cruckton in the
parish of Pontesbury in 1463. It has been supposed that the
Harries's are of the old race of "Fitz-Henry," mentioned in ancient
deeds of this county, and who were seated at Little Sutton prior to
the reign of Edward III.

See Blakeway, p. 178; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Ermine, three bars azure, over all three annulets or_.

Present Representative, Francis Harries, Esq.




SALWEY OF MOOR PARK.


[Illustration] About the reign of Henry III. William Salwey was Lord
of Leacroft, a hamlet in the parish of Cannock in Staffordshire;
hence the family removed to Stanford in Worcestershire; of' which
John Salwey was owner in the third of Henry IV. But this estate was
carried by an heiress to Sir Francis Winnington in the reign of
Charles II. Richard Salwey, younger brother of Edward Salwey of
Stanford, was seated at Richard's Castle in the county of Hereford
at the time of the Protectorate. His grandson Richard was of the
Moor Park, where he died in 1759, and was succeeded by his
great-nephew, whose grandson is the present representative of this
ancient family. See Erdeswick's Staffordshire, ed. 1844, p.
200; Nash's Worcestershire, ii. 369; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Sable, a saltier engrailed or_.

Present Representative, John Salwey, Esq.




BOROUGH OF CHETWYND.


[Illustration] Lineally descended from Robert "Borowe," noticed by
Leland in his Itinerary, which Robert died in 1418, and was father
of Robert surnamed de Stokeden, Lord of Erdborough in the county of
Leicester.

Chetwynd was purchased by Thomas Borough, Esq., in 1803, the family
having been previously for many years resident at Derby.

See Glover's History of the County of Derby, 8vo. 1833, vol. ii. p.
558, who refers to the genealogy of the family in the College of
Arms, 4 Norfolk, p. 189; Nichols's Leicestershire, ii. 528; and
Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Gules, the stem and trunk of a tree eradicated, as also
couped, sprouting out two branches argent_. In 1702 a frightful
modern coat founded on the preceding, with the shield of Pallas
dependent from an oak-tree or, was granted by the College of Arms.

Present Representative, John Charles Burton Borough, Esq.




SOMERSETSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


POULETT OF HINTON ST. GEORGE, EARL POULETT 1706; BARON 1627.


[Illustration] Paulet, in the hundred of North Petherton in this
county, gave name to this historical family, the first on record
being Sir William de Paulet, who died in 1242. He was of Leigh in
Devonshire, which, with Rode in Somersetshire, successively became
the family seat. Hinton St. George, which came from the heiress of
Denebaud in the reign of Henry VI., is noticed by Leland as "a right
goodly manor place of fre stone, with two goodly high tourres
embattled in the ynner court," and has ever since remained the seat
of this the elder branch of the family. The Marquesses of Winchester
(1551) and the extinct Dukes of Bolton descend from William second
son of Sir John Paulet of Paulet, who died in 1378. They were of
Basing in Hampshire, derived through the heiress of Poynings from
the great house of St.John, in the reign of Henry VI.

See Leland's Itinerary, ii. fol. 55, vi. fol. 11; Brydges's Collins,
ii. 367, iv. 1; Collinson's History of Somersetshire, ii. p. 165.
For an account of Hinton St. George, the Topographer, vol. i. p.
171, vol. ii. p.354. For Basing, Gent. Mag. 1787, p. 680.

ARMS.--_Sable, three swords in pile, their points towards the base,
argent, the pomels and hilts or. Gules, a pair of wings conjoined in
lure argent_, being the coat of his mother the heiress of Reyney,
was borne by Sir John Paulet in the 15th of Richard II.

Present Representative, William Poulett, 6th Earl Poulett.




SPEKE OF JORDANS.


[Illustration] This is a younger branch of an ancient family
descended from Richard le Espek, who lived in the reign of Henry II.
Wemworthy and Brampton, in the county of Devon, were the original
seats; but in the time of Henry VI. Sir John Speke, having married
an heiress of Beauchamp, became possessed of the manor of
Whitelackington in this county, which for eleven generations
continued the inheritance of his descendants in the male line, when
an heiress carried it to the Norths, Earls of Guildford. Jordans, a
hamlet in the manor of Ashill, also inherited from the Beauchamps,
appears to be the only remnant of the former possessions of this
venerable house.

See Leland's Itinerary, ii. ff. 51, 55; Topographer, i. 507; and
Collinson's History of Somersetshire, i. pp. 12, 66.

ARMS.--_Barry of eight argent and azure, an eagle with two heads
displayed gules_.

Present Representative, William Speke, Esq.




+Gentle.+


TREVELYAN OF NETTLECOMB, BARONET 1661-2.


[Illustration] The name sufficiently implies that this is a Cornish
family, traced to Nicholas de Trevelyan living in the reign of
Edward I., whose ancestors were of Trevelyan, in the parish of St.
Vehap, near Fowey, at a still earlier period. Nettlecomb was
inherited from the heiress of Whalesborough towards the end of the
fifteenth century. The Trevelyans suffered for their loyalty during
the Usurpation, and were rewarded by the baronetcy on the
Restoration. The estate of Wallington, in the county of
Northumberland, came from the heiress of Calverley of Calverley in
the last century.

Younger Branch, Trevelyan of Nether-Witton in the county of
Northumberland.

See Westcote's Devonshire Pedigrees, p. 558; Collinson's
Somersetshire, iii. p. 539; Gilbert's Cornwall, i. 564; Hodgson's
History of Northumberland, vol. i. pt. 2. p. 262; and Wotton's
Baronetage, iii. p. 353.

ARMS.--_Gules, a land-horse argent, armed or, coming out of the sea
party per fess wavy azure and of the second_. This coat is
traditionally derived from one of the family swimming on horseback
from the rocks called Seven Stones to the Land's End, at the time of
an inundation. The more ancient arms are said to have been _a lion
rampant holding a baton_.

Present Representative, Sir Walter Calverley Trevelyan, 6th
Baronet.




UPTON (CALLED SMYTH) OF ASHTON-COURT, BARONET 1859.

[Illustration] An ancient Cornish family, said to have been
originally of Upton, in that county, or, according to Prince in his
Worthies of Devon, named from Upton in the parish of Collumpton in
Devonshire, and fixed at Portlinch in the parish of Newton Ferrers,
by a match with the heiress of Mohun, about the end of the fifteenth
century. Here the elder branch was long seated, and became extinct
in 1709. The present family descend from a younger brother, who
settled at Lupton in Devonshire: his descendant was of Ingmire Hall
in Westmerland, derived from the heiress of Otway about the
beginning of the eighteenth century. The present representative,
succeeding to the estates of the Smyths of Ashton, assumed that
name, and was created a Baronet in 1859.

Younger Branches. Upton of Glyde-Court in the county of Louth,
descended from the third son of John Upton of Lupton, living in
1620; and Upton, Baron Templetown, descended from Henry second son
of Arthur Upton of Lupton. This Henry came into Ireland in 1598, a
captain in the army under the Earl of Essex, and established himself
in the county of Antrim.

See Prince's Worthies of Devon, ed. 1701, p. 572; Westcote's
Devonshire, p. 519; and Archdall's Lodge's Peerage of Ireland, vii.
p. 152.

ARMS.--_Sable, a cross moline argent_.

Present Representative, Sir John Henry Greville Upton Smythe,
Baronet.




SOUTHAMPTONSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


TICHBORNE OF TICHBORNE, BARONET 1620.


[Illustration] Of the great antiquity of this family there is no
doubt, they having been seated at their manor of Tichborne from the
reign of Henry II., at which period Sir Roger de Tichborne, their
first recorded ancestor, was lord of that manor. The immediate
ancestors of the present family were of Aldershot, in this county,
being descended from the second son of the first Baronet. Henry
Tichborne, grandson of the celebrated Sir Henry Tichborne, so
distinguished during the Great Rebellion in Ireland, and who was
fourth son of the first Baronet, was raised to the peerage in
Ireland as Baron Ferrard in 1715; he died, and the peerage became
extinct, in 1728.

See Wotton's Baronetage, i. 425; Collectanea Topographica et
Genealogica, vii. p. 213; and for a notice of Chidiock Tichborne,
engaged in the Babington Conspiracy in 1586, see Disraeli's
Curiosities of Literature, 1st series, vol. iii. p. 95.

ARMS.--_Vair, a chief or_, borne by Sir John Tichborne in the sixth
of Henry IV.

Present Representative, Sir Alfred Joseph, Doughty Tichborne, 11th
Baronet.




OGLANDER OF NUNWELL, BARONET 1665.


[Illustration] Richard de Okelandre, the patriarch of his family, is
supposed to have been of Norman origin, and was Lord of Nunwell, in
the Isle of Wight, the present seat, from the time of King John.
Seventeenth in direct male descent from Richard, was Sir John
Oglander, Knt., a great sufferer, both in person and fortune, for
his zealous attachment to his sovereign King Charles I. He died
before the Restoration, but his loyalty was recognised by the
baronetcy conferred upon his son, a worthy successor to his father,
by Charles II. in 1665.

See Hutchins's History of Dorset, i, p. 450, for an account of the
family under "Parnham," which came from the heiress of Strode; see
also Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 492.

ARMS.--_Azure, a stork between three cross-crosslets fitchée or_.

Present Representative, Sir Henry Oglander, 7th Baronet.




WALLOP OF WALLOP, EARL OF PORTSMOUTH 1743.


[Illustration] The true and original name of this family is Barton,
Peter de Barton, lord of West Barton, in this county, having married
Alice, only daughter and heiress of Sir Robert de Wallop, who died
in the eleventh year of Edward I. His great-grandson Richard assumed
the name of Wallop, and was returned as one of the knights of the
shire for the county of Southampton in the second of Edward III.
Over and Nether Wallop, so called, says Camden, "from Well-hop, that
is, a pretty well in the side of a hill," continued till the reign
of Henry V. the principal seat, when Margaret de Valoynes brought
into the family the manor of Farley, afterwards called
Farley-Wallop, which has since been the usual residence of the
Wallops; of whom Sir John was greatly distinguished in the reign of
Henry VII., and Sir Henry in Ireland in that of Elizabeth. Robert
Wallop, grandson of Sir Henry, unfortunately taking part against his
sovereign Charles I., and sitting as one of his judges, though he
did not sign the fatal warrant, fell into universal contempt after
the Restoration, and died in the Tower of London in 1667. He was
great-grandfaher of the first peer.

See Brydges's Collins, iv. p. 291.

ARMS.--_Argent, a bend wavy sable_. This coat was borne by Monsieur
John de Barton in the reign of Richard II. (Roll.)

Present Representative, Isaac Newton Wallop, 5th Earl of
Portsmouth.




COPE OF BRAMSHILL, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] The Copes appear in the character of civil servants
of the crown in the reign of Richard II. and Henry IV., and were
rewarded with large grants of land in the counties of Northampton
and Buckingham. Hardwick and Hanwell, both in the neighbourhood of
Banbury, were subsequently the family seats, and are noticed by
Leland, who calls the latter "a very pleasant and gallant house."
Towards the end of the seventeenth century the family appear to have
been established at Bramshill, traditionally said to have been built
for Henry Prince of Wales, eldest son of King James I.

See Wotton's Baronetage i. p. 112; and Beesley's History of Banbury,
p. 190.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a chevron azure between three roses gules,
slipped and leaved vert, as many fleurs-de-lis or_. The original
coat was, _Argent, a boar passant sable_, which William Cope,
Cofferer to Henry VII., abandoned for _Argent, three coffers sable_,
allusive to his office; but he afterwards had assigned to him the
present arms alluding to the royal badges of the crown.

Present Representative, the Rev. Sir William Henry Cope, 12th
Baronet.




STAFFORDSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


OKEOVER OF OKEOVER.


[Illustration] Ormus, at the period of the Norman Conquest was Lord
of Okeover by grant of Nigel, Abbot of Burton. He is the direct
ancestor of this venerable house, which has been ever since in
possession of the ancient seat which gives name to the family, and
which lies on the very edge of the county, near Ashbourne in
Derbyshire.

See Wood's MSS. 8594, vol. 6, for a very curious and valuable
cartulary of the Okeovers, and Dodsworth's MSS. 5037, vol. 96, fol.
17 (both in the Bodleian Library); see also Erdeswick's
Staffordshire, Harwood's ed. 1844, p. 487; Shaw's Staffordshire,
vol. i. p. 26; and the Topographer, ii. p. 313.

ARMS.--_Ermine, on a chief gules three bezants_. This coat was borne
by Monsieur Philip de Oker, in the reign of Richard II. (Roll).

Present Representative, Haughton Charles Okeover, Esq.




BAGOT OF BAGOT'S BROMLEY; BARON BAGOT 1780; BARONET 1627.


[Illustration] A most ancient family, also coeval with the Conquest,
descended from Bagod, who at the time of the compilation of Domesday
Book held Bromley of Robert de Stadford or Stafford. In the reign of
Richard I. the male line of the Staffords failing, Milicent Stafford
married Henry Bagot of this family, and their issue, assuming their
mother's name, were progenitors of the illustrious house of
Stafford, Dukes of Buckingham. Blythfield in this county, which came
from an heiress of that name, has been the seat of the Bagots from
the thirteenth century.

Younger Branches. Chester of Chicheley Hall, co. Bucks, and Bagot of
Pype Hayes, co. Warwick, descended from the second and third sons of
Sir Walter W. Bagot, father of the first Lord Bagot.

See Bagot Memorials, privately printed, 4to. 1824; Wotton's
Baronetage, ii. 47; and Erdeswick, p. 262.

ARMS.--_Ermine, two chevrons azure_. A former coat was, _Argent, a
chevron gules between three martlets sable_, which was used from the
reign of Edward III. to that of Henry VIII. (Rolls.) The present
coat is of still greater antiquity.

Present Representative, William Bagot, 3rd Baron Bagot.




GIFFORD OF CHILLINGTON.


[Illustration] A noble Norman family, which is traced to the
Conquest, and of which there were in Leland's time four "notable
houses" remaining in England, in the counties of Devon, Southampton,
Stafford, and Buckingham. All with the exception of the third have
been long extinct. The Giffords have been seated in Staffordshire
since the reign of Henry II., when Peter Gifford, by the gift of
Peter Corbesone, became Lord of the Manor of Chillington, ever since
their principal residence. He is called in the Deed of Gift, "_Nepos
uxoris meae_." This family had the honour to be concerned in the
preservation of King Charles II. after the Battle of Worcester.

See Erdeswick, p. 158, corrected from Huntbach's MSS. penes Lord
Wrottesley.

ARMS.--_Azure, three stirrups with leathers or_. The more ancient
coat, which was used by the elder line of the Giffords, who were
Earls of Buckingham, was, _Gules, three lions passant argent_.

Present Representative, Thomas William Gifford, Esq.




WROTTESLEY OF WROTTESLEY: BARON WROTTESLEY 1838; BARONET 1542.

[Illustration] "Sumetime," writes Leland, "the Wrotesleys were men
of more land than they bee now, and greate with the Earles of
Warwick; yet he hath 200 markes of londe; at Wrotesley is a fayre
house and a parker" and here, it may be added, the family are
supposed to have been seated from the period of the Conquest. The
pedigree however is not proved beyond William de Wrottesley, lord of
that manor before the reign of Henry III., father of Sir Hugh, who,
joining the insurgent Barons in the reign of Henry III., forfeited
his estate, redeemed under the dictum de Kenelworth for 60 marcs.
His great-grandson Sir Hugh Wrottesley, one of the "Founders" of the
Order of the Garter, who died in 1380-1, is the direct ancestor of
the present lord.

See Leland's Itinerary in Coll. Topog. et Genealogica, iii. 340;
Erdeswick, p. 359; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 345; and Shaw's
Staffordshire, ii. 205, kindly corrected by the Hon. Charles
Wrottesley.

ARMS.--_Or, three piles sable and a quarter ermine_. The more
ancient coat, as appears by seals to original deeds of the years
1298 and 1333-37, preserved at Wrottesley, was _fretty_. Sir Hugh de
Wrottesleye bore the present arms in 1349 and 1381. But he is also
stated, on the authority of the Roll of the reign of Richard II., to
have used, _Or, a bend engrailed gules_. Sir William Wrottesley,
father of Sir Hugh, K.G., married Joan, daughter of Roger Basset,
which will account for the present arms, which belonged to the
Bassets of Warwickshire.

Present Representative, John Wrottesley, 2nd Baron Wrottesley.




BROUGHTON OF BROUGHTON, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] "The Broughtons descend in the male line from one of
the most ancient families of the county of Chester, the Vernons of
Shipbrook. Richard de Vernon, a younger brother of this house, was
father of Adam de Napton, in the county of Warwick, whose issue
assumed their local name from Broughton in Staffordshire. The
pedigrees vary as to the exact point of connection, and, confused
and contradictory as the Shipbrooke pedigree is at this period,
there can be little hope of its being positively identified; but the
general fact of descent is allowed by all authorities."

See Ormerod's Cheshire, iii. 269; Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 259; and
Erdeswick, p. 111.

ARMS.--_Argent, two bars gules, on a canton of the last a cross of
the first_. In the reign of Richard II. Monsieur Thomas de Broughton
bore, _Azure, a cross engrailed argent_. (Roll.)

Present Representative, Sir Henry Delves Broughton, ninth
Baronet.




MAINWARING OF WHITMORE.


[Illustration] The first recorded ancestor of this great and
widely-spreading family is Ranulphus, a Norman, Lord of Warmincham,
in Cheshire, at the period of the Domesday Survey; where his
descendants remained seated for two centuries. In the reign of Henry
III. they were of Over-Peover in the same county, and remained there
until the principal male line became extinct in the person of Sir
Henry Mainwaring of Peover, Baronet, who died unmarried in 1797.
Whitmore was inherited by Edward ninth son of Sir John Mainwaring of
Peover, on his marriage with the heiress of Humphry de Boghey or
Bohun of Whitmore. This was in the year 1519. The senior line of the
Mainwarings were on the loyal side during the great Rebellion, and
in 1745 opposed to the pretensions of the house of Stuart. But the
Whitmore branch favoured the Parliamentary interest.

Younger Branch. Mainwaring of Oteley Park, in the parish of
Ellesmere in Shropshire, sprung from Randle, third son of Edward
Mainwaring of Whitmore.

Extinct Branches. Maynwaring of Ightfield, co. Salop; extinct 1712.
(See Blakeway, Sheriffs of Shropshire, pp. 83, 133.) Mainwaring of
Kermincham, co. Chester, extinct 1783. (See Ormerod's Cheshire, vol.
iii. p. 46.) And Mainwaring of Bromborough, in the same county,
extinct 1827.

See Erdeswick's Staffordshire, p. 78; and Ormerod, vol. i. p. 368;
vol. ii. p. 239; vol. iii. p. 447.

ARMS.--_Argent, two bars gules_.

Present Representative, Rowland Mainwaring, Esq.




ARDEN OF LONGCROFT.


[Illustration] No family in England can claim a more noble origin
than the house of Arden, descended in the male line from the Saxon
Earls of Warwick before the Conquest. The name of Arden was assumed
from the Woodlands of Arden, in the North of Warwickshire, by Siward
de Arden, in the reign of Henry I.; which Siward was grandson of
Alwin the Sheriff in the reign of Edward the Confessor. The elder
line of the family was long seated at Park-Hall in Warwickshire, and
became extinct in 1643. A younger branch descended from Simon second
son of Thomas Arden, of Park-Hall, Esq. settled at Longcroft, in the
parish of Yoxall, in the reign of Elizabeth, and now represents this
most ancient and noble family.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, 2nd edit. vol. ii. p. 295; Shaw's
Staffordshire, vol. i. p. 102; and Erdeswick, p. 279; also a paper
by George Ormerod, Esq. LL.D., the historian of Cheshire, "On the
connection of Arden, or Arderne, of Cheshire, with the Ardens of
Warwickshire," in "The Topographer and Genealogist," vol. i. 1846.

ARMS.--_Ermine, a fess checky or and azure_, and so borne by
Sir----de Arderne in the reign of Edward II. (Roll.)

Present Representative, George Pincard Arden, Esq.




MEYNELL OF HORE-CROSS.


[Illustration] An ancient Derbyshire family, which can be traced to
the reign of Henry II. One of their most ancient possessions was
Langley-Meynell, in that county, an estate which remained in the
family till the end of the fourteenth century. A younger son at this
period was seated at Yeaveley, his grandson at Willington, both in
Derbyshire. Bradley, in the same county, became in the seventeenh
century, by purchase, the residence of a still younger branch,
descended from Francis, fourth son of Godfrey Meynell of Willington:
from him descends the present family, who were of Hore-Cross the
latter part of the last century. Temple-Newsom, in Yorkshire, was
inherited from the Ingrams by the present Mr. Meynell on the death
of the Marchioness of Hertford in 1835.

Younger Branch. Meynell of Langley-Meynell, Derbyshire, descended
from Francis, second son of Francis Meynell, of Willington, who died
in 1616.

See Leland's Itinerary, iv. fo. 17; and Topographer and Genealogist,
i. 439, and 494.

ARMS.--_Vaire argent and sable_. This was the coat of De-la-Ward, of
which house Hugh de Meynell married the heiress in the reign of
Edward III. The proper coat of Meynell was, _Paly of six argent and
gules, on a bend azure three horseshoes or_.

Present Representative, Hugo Charles Meynell-Ingram, Esq.




+Gentle.+


WOLSELEY OF WOLSELEY, BARONET 1628.


[Illustration] "The most ancient among all the very ancient families
in this county," writes Mr. Harwood in his notes to Erdeswick's
Staffordshire. Siward, mentioned as Lord of Wlselei in a deed
without date, is the first in the pedigree of this venerable house,
who are said to have been resident at Wolseley even before the
Norman Conquest, and it has ever since remained their seat and
residence.

Younger Branch. Wolseley of Mount Wolseley, in the county of Carlow,
Baronet of Ireland (1744), descended from the third son of the
second Baronet.

See Erdeswick, p. 203; Wotton's Baronetage, ii. 133.

ARMS.--_Argent, a talbot passant gules_.

Present Representative, Sir Charles Michael Wolseley, ninth
Baronet.




COTES OF COTES.


[Illustration] Descended from Richard de Cotes, who was probably son
of Thomas de Cotes, living in 1157, when the Black Book of the
Exchequer was compiled. About the reign of Henry VI. the family
removed to Woodcote, in Shropshire, which has since continued the
principal seat, though the more ancient manor of Cotes or "Kothes,"
on the banks of the Sow, has ever remained the property of this
ancient house.

See Blakeway's Sheriffs of Shropshire, p. 103; and Erdeswick, p.
122.

ARMS.--_Quarterly ermine and paly of six or and gules_. According to
the Visitation of Shropshire in 1623, the ermine was borne in the
third and fourth quarter. Erdeswick observes, "It would seem that
the Cotes's should derive themselves from the Knightleys, or else
they do the Knightleys wrong by usurping their armoury." It may be
remarked that Robert, third in descent from the first Robert de
Cotes, married a daughter of Richard de Knightley, and from hence
perhaps the arms.

Present Representative, John Cotes, Esq.




CONGREVE OF CONGREVE.


[Illustration] The name, like those of most ancient families, is
local, derived from Congreve, in this county, where the ancestors of
this house were seated soon after the Conquest.

In the reign of Edward II. William Congreve removed to the adjoining
village of Stretton, having married the heiress of Campion of that
place. Stretton was sold towards the end of the eighteenth century,
but Congreve still continues the inheritance of its ancient lords.

Younger Branch. Congreve of Walton, Baronet 1812.

See Erdeswick, p. 167.

ARMS.--_Sable, a chevron between three battleaxes argent_. This is,
says Erdeswick, the coat of Campion.

Present Representative, William Walter Congreve, Esq.




SNEYD OF KEEL.


[Illustration] "The noble race of Sneyds, of great worship and
account,"* appear to be denominated from Snead, a hamlet in the
parish of Tunstall, in this county, where they were seated as early
as the reign of Henry III. By marriage with the heiress of Tunstall
they had other lands in that parish, and for two descents were
called Snead alias Tunstall. Bradwell, the former seat of this
family, was purchased in the reign of Henry IV. The fine old house
at Keel, lately taken down and now rebuilt, was erected by Ralph
Sneyd, Esq. in 1581. During the Usurpation, the Sneyds being on the
loyal side, Keel house narrowly escaped destruction, and many of the
ancient evidences were plundered and lost at that time.

Younger Branches. Sneyd of Ashcombe, and of Loxley in this county,
descended from the second son of William Sneyd, of Keel, who died in
1694: and the Sneyds of Ireland, descended from Wettenhall,
Archdeacon of Kilmore, younger brother of the ancestor of the
preceding branches.

See Erdeswick, pp. 20, 25; Leland's Itinerary in Coll. Topog. et
Genealog. iii. 342; Gent. Mag. vol. lxxi. p. 28; and Ward's History
of the Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent.

ARMS.--_Argent, a scythe, the blade in chief, the sned and handle in
bend sinister sable, on the fess point a fleur-de-lis of the
second_. This fleur-de-lis is said to have been assumed by Richard
de Tunstall, alias Sneyd, after the battle of Poictiers.

Present Representative, Ralph Sneyd, Esq.

  * King's Vale Royal, b. ii. p. 77, who would derive them from
    Cheshire.




WHITGREAVE OF MOSELEY.


[Illustration] In the reign of Henry III., Robert Whitgreave, the
ancestor of this family, was seated at Burton near Stafford.
Bridgeford, in the vicinity of Whitgreave, from whence the name is
derived, and early in the seventeenth century Moseley, successively
became the residence of the Whitgreaves, and at the latter place
Thomas Whitgreave, Esq. had the honour to shelter his sovereign
Charles II. after the battle of Worcester.

See Erdeswick, pp. 137, 185, 348.

ARMS.--_Azure, on a cross quarterly pierced or four chevrons gules_.
This coat, founded on the arms of Stafford, was granted by Humphry
Earl of Stafford to Robert Whitgrave in the 20th of Henry VI. See
the grant in Camden's Remains, ed. 1657, p. 221. An augmentation has
been lately added, _On a chief argent, a rose gules within a wreath
of oak proper_.

Present Representative, George Thomas Whitgreave, Esq.




LANE OF KING'S BROMLEY.


[Illustration] The ancient seat of this family was at Bentley in
this county, of which Richard Lane was possessed in the sixth of
Henry VI. The Lanes can be traced to Adam de Lone de Hampton,
grandfather of Richard de le Lone de Hampton, in the ninth of Edward
II. (1315). The three last Lanes of Bentley each lessened the
estate, mainly from their devotion to the ill-fated house of Stuart;
and the fourth, John Lane, sold Bentley in 1748. This family, even
more than the Giffords and Whitgreaves, can lay claim to be
remembered for its loyalty to Charles II. after his flight from
Worcester. The celebrated Jane Lane was the daughter of the then
head of the house, and rode behind the King from Bentley to Bristol.
King's Bromley was inherited from the Newtons about the end of the
last century.

See Erdeswick, pp. 235, 410; Shaw's Staffordshire, vol. ii. p. 97;
Gent. Mag. for 1822, vol. i. pp. 194, 415, 482.

ARMS.--_Per fesse or and azure, a chevron gules between three
mullets counter-changed, on a canton of the third the Royal lions of
England_, being an augmentation granted by Charles II.

Present Representative, John Newton Lane, Esq.




SUFFOLK.


+Knightly.+


BARNARDISTON OF THE RYES.


[Illustration] A very remote but the only remaining branch of what
was in former ages the most important family in Suffolk, descended
from Geoffry de Barnardiston, of Barnardiston in this county, who
was living in the reign of Edward I., and who by his marriage with
the daughter and coheir of Newmarch became possessed of the
adjoining manor of Kedington or Ketton, which continued the seat and
residence of the Barnardistons, created Baronet in 1663, until the
death of Sir John the sixth Baronet of Ketton, in 1745. The present
family descended from Thomas Barnardiston, a merchant in London, who
died in 1681, fifth son of Sir Thomas of Ketton, Knight, and Mary,
daughter of Sir Richard Knightley. Besides the elder and principal
line of Ketton, other branches were of Brightwell in this county,
(created Baronets in 1663, extinct in 1721,) and of Northill, co.
Bedford, extinct in 1778.

See Wotton's Baronetage, iii. 396; and Davy's Suffolk Collections in
the British Museum, Add. MSS. 19,116, p. 537, for long and
interesting accounts of this remarkable family.

ARMS.--_Azure, a fess dancettée ermine between six cross-crosslets
argent_.

Present Representative, Nathaniel Clarke Barnardiston. Esq.




JENNEY OF BREDFIELD.


[Illustration] This ancient family is supposed to be of French
extraction, and the name to be derived from Guisnes near Calais. The
first in the pedigree is Edmund Jenny, of Knoddishall, in this
county; grandfather of John Jenney, of the same place, who died in
1460; who was father of Sir William, one of the Judges of the King's
Bench in 1477. Edmund, second son of Sir Robert Jenney, of
Knoddishall, who died in 1660, married Dorothy, daughter and
coheiress of Robert Marryatt, of Bredfield, from whom the present
family descend.

See Davy's Suffolk Collections, Add. MSS. 19,137, p. 181.

ARMS.--_Ermine, a bend gules cotised or_.

Present Representative, William Jenney, Esq.




BROOKE OF UFFORD.


[Illustration] Sir Thomas Brooke, Knight, Lord Cobham in right of
his wife, Joan, daughter and heir of Sir Reginald Braybrooke,
Knight, was sixth in descent from William de la Brooke, owner of the
manor of Brooke, in the county of Somerset, who died in the
fifteenth of Henry III. (1231). Sir Thomas Brooke died in the
seventeenth of Henry VI. From his eldest son descended the Barons
Cobham; from Reginald the second son sprung the present family. He
was seated at Aspel, in Suffolk, and here his descendants continued
for nine generations. Ufford came from the heiress of Thomson in
1761.

See Davy's Suffolk Collections, Add. MSS. 19,120, vol. xliv.; and
Gent. Mag. for March 1841, p. 306, for an account of the restoration
of the Brooke monuments at Cobham.

ARMS.--_Gules, on a chervon argent a lion rampant sable_.

Present Representative, Francis Capper Brooke, Esq.




HERVEY OF ICKWORTH, MARQUESS OF BRISTOL 1826; EARL 1714; BARON 1703.


[Illustration] Descended from Thomas Hervey, who died before 1470,
having married Jane, daughter and sole heir of Henry Drury, of
Ickworth. There is some uncertainty as to who this Thomas Hervey
was; the peerages indeed assume that he was younger brother of Sir
George Hervey, of Thurleigh, in Bedfordshire; Mr. Gages however has
proved that this could not have been the case, but the Rev. Lord
Arthur Hervey in his interesting Memoir on Ickworth and the Hervey
family, has adduced several reasons by which it would seem that
Thomas Hervey was a younger son of John Hervey, senior, of
Thurleigh, and the coheiress of Niernuyt, and uncle of Sir George,
the last of the legitimate elder line of that knightly family.

Younger Branch. Bathurst Hervey, of Clarendon, Wiltshire, Baronet
1818, descended from the eighth son of the first Earl of Bristol.

See Gage's Thingoe, p. 286; Brydges's Collins, iv. p. 139; Davy's
Suffolk Collections, Add. MSS. 19,135, vol. lix. p. 160; the Rev.
Lord Arthur Hervey's papers on Ickworth and the Family of Hervey,
4to. Lowestoft, 1858; and Proceedings of the Suffolk Archaeological
Society, vol. ii. No. 7.

ARMS.--_Gules, on a bend argent three trefoils slipped vert_, and so
borne by John Hervey, Esq., as appears by "The Proceedings in the
Grey and Hastings Controversy" in the Court of Chivalry in the year
1407. See the Proceedings, privately printed by Lord Hastings in
1841, p. 27. The arms of Hervey appear to have been founded on the
coat of Foliot, _Gules, a bend argent_.

Present Representative, Frederick William John Hervey, 3rd Marquess
of Bristol.




+Gentle.+


ROUS OF DENNINGTON AND HENHAM, EARL OF STRADBROKE 1821; BARON 1796;
BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] "All the Roucis that be in Southfolk cum oute of the
house of Rouse of Dennington," writes Leland in his Itinerary, vol.
vi. fol. 13. That estate appears to have come into the family by the
marriage of Peter Rouse with an heiress of Hobart in the reign of
Edward III., and to have been increased afterwards by matches with
the heiress of le-Watre and Phillips, the last representing one of
the co-heiresses of Erpingham. Henham, the present residence, was
purchased in 1545 by Sir Anthony Rous, son of Sir William Rous of
Dennington.

See Wotton's Baronetage, iii. p. 159; Brydges's Collins, viii. p.
476; Suckling's History and Antiquities of Suffolk, vol. ii. p. 365;
and Davy's Suffolk Collections, Add. MSS. 19,147, vol. lxxi. p.
192.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess dancettée or between three crescents argent_.

Present Representative, John Edward Cornwallis Rous, 2nd Earl of
Stradbroke.




HEIGHAM OF HUNSTON.


[Illustration] A younger branch of an old Suffolk family, who
derived their name from a hamlet in the parish of Gaseley in this
county. The pedigree is traced to Richard Heigham, who died in 1340;
his grandson Thomas was of Heigham, and died in 1409. The elder line
ended in co-heiresses in 1558. A younger branch was seated at
Barrow, and continued there till 1714, founded by Clement, fourth
son of Thomas Heigham, of Heigham, Esq., who died in 1492. From Sir
Clement, third in descent from the first Clement, the present family
is descended. Hunston was inherited from the heiress of Lurkin in
1701.

See Gage's History of the Hundred of Thingoe, p. 8; and Davy's
Suffolk Collections, Add. MSS. 19,135, vol. lix. p. 50.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess cheeky, or and azure, between three horse's
heads erased argent_.

Present Representative, John Henry Heigham, Esq.




BLOIS OF COCKFIELD HALL, BARONET 1686.


[Illustration] This family is supposed to derive its name from Blois
in France, and is thought to be of great antiquity in this county;
it is not regularly deduced, however, beyond Thomas Blois, who was
living at Norton in Suffolk in 1470. Third in descent was Richard
Blois of Grundisburgh, which he purchased, and which became for many
years the principal seat of the family. He died in 1557.

See Wotton's Baronetage, iv. p. 9; and Davy's Suffolk Collections,
Add. MSS. 91,118, vol. xlii. p. 386.

ARMS.--_Gules, a bend vair between two fleurs-de-lis argent_.
Gwillim makes the field _sable_, and the fleurs-de-lis _or_.

Present Representative, Sir John Ralph Blois, 8th Baronet.




SURREY.


+Knightly.+


BRAY OF SHERE.


[Illustration] The first in the pedigree is Sir Robert Bray, of
Northamptonshire, father of Sir James, who lived about the period of
Richard I. His great-grandson, Thomas, was lord of Thurnby, in the
same county, in the ninth of Edward II. (1316); from him descended
Sir Edward Bray, who died in 1558. Harleston, also in the county of
Northampton, was an ancient seat of the Bray family, which rose into
opulence with the success of Henry VII. after the Battle of
Bosworth, where Sir Reginald Bray, the devoted adherent of the King,
was said to have discovered the crown in a thorn-bush, in memory of
which he afterwards bore for his badge, "a thorn with a crown in the
middle of it." Shere was granted, with many other manors, to Sir
Reginald as a reward for his services. The present family spring
from Reginald, eldest son by the first wife of Sir Edward Bray, son
of John, and nephew of the celebrated Sir Reginald. Edmund Lord Bray
was elder brother of Sir Edward; he had an only son, John Lord Bray,
who died s. p. in 1557.

Of this family was William Bray, Esq., Treasurer of the Society of
Antiquaries, and joint Historian of Surrey.

See Leland's Itinerary, viii. 113, a; and Manning and Bray's Surrey,
vol. i. p. 514-523.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three eagle's legs sable erased a
la cuisse, their talons gules_. Another coat usually quartered with
the above is, _Vair, three bends gules_.

Present Representative, Edward Bray, Esq.




PERCEVAL OF NORK HOUSE, EARL OF EGMONT IN IRELAND 1733; BARON LOVELL
AND HOLLAND 1762; BARON ARDEN 1802.


[Illustration] "The House of Yvery," a work privately printed by the
second Earl of Egmont in 1742, professes to give the history of this
family, but the earlier descents cannot with certainty be relied on,
and even the extraction of Richard Perceval, the modern founder of
the present family in the time of James I., from the Somersetshire
Percevals, is according to Brydges, in his Biographical Peerage, not
without some doubts. It appears, however, certain that he was the
son of George Perceval, of Tykenham, in the county of Somerset, by
Elizabeth Bampfylde, and fifth in descent from Richard Perceval, of
Weston-Gordein, in the same county, who died between 1433 and 1439,
the representative of a family who had been seated there from the
reign of Richard I., and who claim to be descended from the House of
Yvery in Normandy. The elder branch of the Percevals continued at
their manor of Weston until the extinction of the male line in the
person of Thomas Perceval, Esq. in 1691. The younger branch, the
ancestors of the present family, were seated in the county of
Cork in Ireland, and in the eighteenth century at Enmore in
Somersetshire, sold after the death of the fifth Earl of Egmont.
Nork House was the seat of Lord Arden, father of the present Earl,
and brother of the third Earl of Egmont.

See "A Genealogical History of the House of Yvery, &c." 8vo. 1742;
and Collinson's History of Somersetshire, vol. iii. p. 171.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a chief indented gules three crosses patée of the
first_. This coat appears to have been borne by Sir Roger Perceval
in the reign of Edward I. See his seal engraved in "The House of
Yvery," vol. i. p. 41.

Present Representative, George James Perceval, sixth Earl of Egmont.




+Gentle.+


WESTON OF WEST-HORSLEY.


[Illustration] Adam de Weston, living in 1205, was the ancestor of
this family, which has been from a very early period connected with
Surrey. In the reign of Edward II., the Westons were of
West-Clandon, and also of Weston in Albury, and of Send and Ockham,
in this county. The last was sold in the latter part of the
seventeenth century, and West-Horsley inherited by the will of
William Nicholas, Esq. in 1749.

See Manning and Bray's Surrey, vol. iii. p. 41; and Gent. Mag. for
1789, p. 223; for a notice of this family, as well as of the
extinct family of the same name, of Sutton, in this county, see
also Gent. Mag. for 1800, p. 606.

ARMS.--_Sable, a chevron or between three leopard's heads erased
argent, crowned or_.

Present Representative, Henry Weston, Esq.




ONSLOW OF WEST-CLANDON, EARL OF ONSLOW 1801; BARON 1716; BARONET
1660.


[Illustration] Although the foundation of the consequence of this
family was laid by Richard Onslow, a celebrated lawyer of the reign
of Elizabeth, yet he was sprung from an old gentle family seated at
Onslow in Shropshire, as far back as the time of Richard I., and
probably much earlier. The first recorded ancestor is John de
Ondeslowe, whose grandson, Warin, was father of "Roger de Ondeslow
juxta Shrewsbury," whose son Thomas was living in the twelfth of
Edward II. 1318. Richard Onslow became Speaker of the House of
Commons, and died in 1571. He was the first of his family connected
with Surrey, by his marriage with Catherine, daughter and heir of
Richard Harding, of Knoll, in this county, in the year 1554.
West-Clandon was purchased in 1641 by Sir Richard Onslow, created a
Baronet in 1660; the ancient family estate of Onslow having been
sold by Edward Onslow in 1617.

Younger Branches. Onslow of Altham in the county of Lancaster,
Baronet 1797, descended from the next brother of the Right Hon.
Arthur Onslow, Speaker of the House of Commons from 1726 to
1761. Onslow of Staughton, in the county of Huntingdon, descended
from the second son of Sir Richard Onslow, the first Baronet.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. v. p. 461; Manning and Bray's Surrey,
vol. ii. p. 723; and Blakeway's Sheriffs of Shropshire, p. 90,
corrected by the MSS. of Mr. Joseph Morris.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess gules between six Cornish choughs proper_.

Present Representative, Arthur George Onslow, third Earl of
Onslow.




SUSSEX.


+Knightly.+


ASHBURNHAM OF ASHBURNHAM, EARL OF ASHBURNHAM 1730; BARON 1689.


[Illustration] "A family of stupendous antiquity," writes Fuller.
"The most ancient family in these tracts," according to Camden.
"Genealogists have given them a Saxon origin," says Brydges; "but
that is a fact very difficult to be proved, though very commonly
asserted. They do not, I believe, appear in Domesday Book." There
can be no doubt, however, that the Ashburnhams have been seated at
Ashburnham from the reign of Henry II., and probably from a much
earlier period, and are descended from Bertram, Constable of Dover
in the reign of William the Conqueror. By the improvidence of Sir
John Ashburnham, who died in 1620, this ancient patrimony was lost
for a time, but recovered by Frances Holland, the wife of his eldest
son John (the groom of the bed-chamber to Charles I.), who sold her
whole estate, and laid out the money in redeeming Ashburnham.

Younger Branch. Ashburnham of Bromham in this county, Baronet 1661,
descended from Richard, second son of Thomas Ashburnham, living in
the reign of Henry VI.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. iv. p. 249; and Wotton's Baronetage,
vol. iii. p. 283.

ARMS.--_Gules, a fess between six mullets argent_. The earliest seal
remaining of any of the ancestors of this family is, I believe, that
of "Stephen de Esburne," great-grandson of Bertram, the Constable of
Dover: the device is a slip or branch of Ash. His grandson, "Richard
de Hasburnan," bore the Maltravers fret, his mother being daughter
of Sir John Maltravers: the present coat was borne by Sir John de
Aschebornham, in the reign of Edward II. (Seals and Roll of the
reign of Edward II.)

Present Representative, Bertram Ashburnham, 4th Earl of Ashburnham.




GORING OF HIGHDEN, BARONET 1627.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Goring, in the rape of
Arundel, where the family can be traced to John de Goring, living in
the reign of Edward II. Burton, in this county, was the seat of the
principal and elder line of the family, created Baronets in 1662,
extinct in 1723. Of a younger branch was the celebrated George Lord
Goring 1628, Earl of Norwich 1644, (which titles were extinct on the
death of his third son, but heir, the second Lord, in 1670,) sprung
from the second son of Sir William Gorynge, of Burton, who died in
1553.

The present family is descended from the second son of Sir Henry
Goring, of Burton, Knight, who died in 1594. Highden was purchased
in 1647.

Younger Branch. Goring of Wiston, Sussex, descended from the second
marriage of Sir Charles Matthew Goring, of Highden, the fourth
Baronet, and the co-heiress of Fagg.

See Dallaway's Rape of Arundel, p. 281, who refers to Evidences
relating to the family of Goring, MSS. Coll. Arm. Philpot, F. 119;
Leland's Itin., vol. vi. fol. 17; Cartwright's Rape of Bramber, p.
132; and Wotton's Baronetage, vol. ii. p. 71.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three annulets gules_.

Present Representative, Sir Charles Goring, 8th Baronet.




PELHAM OF LAUGHTON, EARL OF CHICHESTER 1801; BARON 1672; BARONET
1611.


[Illustration] The name is local, from Pelham, in Hertfordshire, the
seat of the ancestors of this family in the time of Edward I., and
probably even before the Conquest. In the 28th of Edward I., Walter
de Pelham had a confirmation grant of lands in Heilsham, Horsey, &c.
in this county. From the reign of Edward III. the Pelhams have been
a most important Sussex family; it was in that reign that Sir John
Pelham assumed the Buckle as his badge, in token of his claim to the
honour of taking John King of France prisoner at the battle of
Poictiers. Laughton belonged to the Pelhams before 1403, but has
been long deserted as the residence of the family.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. v. p. 488; Horsfield's Lewes; and
Sussex Archaeological Collections, vol. iii. p. 211, for a curious
paper on the arms and badges of the Pelhams.

ARMS.--_Quarterly,_ 1 _and_ 4_, Azure, three pelicans argent,
vulning themselves proper;_ 2 _and_ 3_, Gules, two belts in pale
argent with buckles and studs or_.

Present Representative, Henry Thomas Pelham, 3rd Earl of Chichester.




SHELLEY OF MARESFIELD, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] Although there is no doubt of the antiquity of the
house of Shelley, the accounts of the earlier descents of the family
are very scanty. Originally of the county of Huntingdon, the
Shelleys are said to have removed into this county at a very early
period. But the earliest mention we have in history of any of this
family is of John and Thomas Shelley, who, following the fortunes of
Richard II., were attainted and beheaded in the first year of Henry
IV. The remaining brother, Sir William Shelley, not being connected
with the followers of Richard II., retained his possessions, and was
the ancestor of this family, who in the reign of Henry VI., by a
match with the heiress of Michelgrove, of Michelgrove, in Clapham,
was seated at that place, which continued the residence of the
Shelleys until the year 1800, when it was sold, and Maresfield
became the family seat.

Younger Branches. Shelley or Castle-Goring, Baronet 1806,
descended from the fourth son of Sir John Shelley, of Michelgrove,
who died in 1526. Shelley of Avington, in the county of Southampton,
and Shelley (called Sidney Foulis) Lord de L'Isle and Dudley 1835,
descended from the second marriage of Sir Bysshe Shelley, of
Castle-Goring, Baronet, and the heiress of Perry, of Penshurst.,

See Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p. 39; Cartwright's Topography of
the Rape of Bramber, p. 76; and Dallaway's Rape of Arundel, p. 40.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess engrailed between three whelk-shells or_.

Present Representative, Sir John Villiers Shelley, 7th Baronet.




WEST OF BUCKHURST, EARL DE LA WARR 1761; BARON 1427.


[Illustration] The Wests are remarkable, not so much for the
antiquity of the family as for the early period at which they
attained the honour of the peerage. Sir Thomas West is the first
recorded ancestor; he died in the seventeenth of Edward II., having
married the heiress of Cantilupe, and thus became possessed of lands
in Devonshire, and at Snitterfield in Warwickshire. His grandson,
Thomas, married the heiress of De la Warr, and thus became connected
with Sussex. But the principal property of the Wests in this county
was granted to Thomas West, afterwards Lord la Warr, in the first
year of Henry VII. Few families indeed had broader lands; among
which may be mentioned, Offington, in the parish of Broadwater,
derived from the heiress of Peverel at the end of the fourteenth
century; and Halnaker, in the parish of Boxgrove, both in Sussex;
and Wherwell, in Hampshire; all now alienated. Buckhurst came to the
present Lord by his marriage with the coheiress of Sackville.

Younger Branch. West of Ruthyn Castle, Denbighshire, descended from
the younger son of John, second Earl De la Warr.

The Wests of Alscot, in the county of Gloucester, claim to be
descended from Leonard, the younger son of Sir Thomas West, Lord De
la Warr, K.G., who died in the year 1525, although there is nothing
but "family tradition," as is evident by the memorial to the Earl
Marshal of Mr. James West, of Alscot, dated December 12, 1768, to
justify this assumption; a distinct coat, viz. _Argent, a fess
dancette pean_, was granted to Mr. West on this occasion.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. v. p. i.; Blore's Rutlandshire, p. 100;
Cartwright's Rape of Bramber, p. 38; and Dallaway's Rape of
Chichester, pp. 129, 133.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess dancette sable_. The badge of the De-la-Warrs
was a crampet or shape of a sword; assumed by Roger la-Warr, Lord
la-Warr, for having assisted Sir John Pelham in making John King of
France prisoner at the Battle of Poictiers. See Sussex
Archaeological Collections, vol. iii. p. 211.

Present Representative, George John Sackville West, 5th Earl De la
Warr.




GAGE OF FIRLE; BARON GAGE 1790; VISCOUNT GAGE IN IRELAND 1720;
BARONET 1622.


[Illustration] John, son of John Gage, living in the ninth of Henry
IV., had issue by Joan, heiress of John Sudgrove, of Sudgrove, in
Gloucestershire, Sir John Gage; an adherent of the house of York,
knighted by Edward IV., and who died in 1475. He married Elianor,
second daughter and coheiress of Thomas St.Clere, of Heighton St.
Clere, in Sussex, and acquired by this marriage several manors in
this county, as well as in Surrey, Kent, Buckinghamshire, and
Northamptonshire. The present family, seated at Firle from this
period, descend from his eldest son. From his second son sprung the
Gages of Raunds, in Northamptonshire, sold in 1675.

Younger Branch. Gage of Hengrave, in Suffolk, Baronet 1622,
descended from Edward, third son of Sir John Gage, of Firle, who
died in 1633.

See Gage's Hengrave, p. 225; Gage's Hundred of Thingoe, p. 204;
Bridges's History of Northamptonshire, vol. ii. p. 188; Wotton's
Baronetage, vol. i. p. 503, vol. iii. p. 366; Brydges's Collins,
vol. viii. p. 249; and Leland's Itinerary, vol. iv. p. 12.

ARMS.--_Party per saltier argent and azure, a saltier gules_.

Present Representative, Henry Hall Gage, 4th Viscount Gage.




+Gentle.+


BARTTELOT OF STOPHAM.


[Illustration] The head of this family, according to Dallaway, may
be considered one of the most ancient proprietors of land residing
upon his estate in this county. The first in the pedigree is Adam de
Bartelott, said to be of Norman origin, father of John, who married
Joan Stopham, coheiress of lands in the manor from whence the name
is derived. He died in 1428, and Stopham has ever since remained the
inheritance of their descendants.

See the Topographer, vol. iv. p. 346; and Cartwright's edition of
Dallaway's Rape of Arundel, p. 347.

ARMS.--_Sable, three falconer's sinister gloves pendent argent,
tasseled or_.

Present Representative, George Barttelot, Esq.




COURTHOPE OF WYLEIGH.

[Illustration] From the reign of King Edward I., this family has
been settled at Wadhurst, Lamberhurst, Ticehurst, and the adjoining
parishes on the borders of Sussex and Kent: at Goudhurst, in the
latter county, they held the manors of Bockingfield and the Pillery
from the year 1413 to 1498, and in 1513 Wyleigh, in the parish of
Ticehurst, was acquired by John Courthope in marriage with his wife
Elizabeth, daughter of William Saunders of Wyleigh. From this
marriage sprung three sons, John, George, and Thomas; the issue male
of the eldest has been long extinct; from the second, who had
Wyleigh, is descended the present Representative of the family; and
from the third and youngest, who succeeded to the estate of
"Courthope" in Goudhurst, is descended William Courthope, Esq.
Somerset Herald.

See Collectanea Topog. et Genealog., vol. ii. pp. 279, 363; and The
Visitation of Sussex, C. 27, in Coll. Arm.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess azure between three estoiles sable_.

Present Representative, George Campion Courthope, Esq.




WARWICKSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


SHIRLEY OF EATINGTON (ELDER BRANCH OF STAUNTON-HAROLD, IN THE COUNTY
OF LEICESTER, EARL FERRERS 1711, BARON FERRERS OF CHARTLEY 1677,
BARONET 1611.)


[Illustration] Sasuualo, or Sewallis, whose name, says Dugdale,
"argues him to be of the old English stock," mentioned in Domesday
as mesne Lord of Eatington, under Henry de Ferrers, is the first
recorded ancestor of this, the oldest knightly family in the county
of Warwick. Until the reign of Edward III., Eatington appears to
have continued the principal seat of the Shirleys, whose name was
assumed in the twelfth century from the manor of Shirley, in
Derbyshire, and which, with Ratcliffe-on-Sore, in the county of
Nottingham, and Rakedale and Staunton-Harold, in Leicestershire,
derived from the heiresses of Basset and Staunton, succeeded, during
the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, as the usual residence of
the chiefs of the house. In the sixteenth century, Astwell, in
Northamptonshire, was brought into the family by the heiress of
Lovett; and in 1615, by the marriage of Sir Henry Shirley with the
coheiress of Devereux, a moiety of the possessions of the Earls of
Essex, after the extinction of that title in 1646, centred in Sir
Robert Shirley, father of the first Earl Ferrers; on whose death, in
1717, the family estates were divided, the Derbyshire,
Leicestershire, and Staffordshire estates descending with the
earldom to the issue of his first marriage, and the Warwickshire
property, the original seat of the Shirleys, eventually to the
great-grandfather of the present possessor, the eldest surviving
son of the second marriage of the first Earl Ferrers.

Elder Branches.* Shirley of Staunton-Harold, in the county of
Leicester, represented by Sewallis Edward, tenth Earl Ferrers 1711;
and Shirley of Shirley, in the county of Derby, represented by the
Rev. Walter Waddington Shirley, Canon of Christ Church, D.D. only
son of the late Bishop of Sodor and Man, and great-grandson of
Walter, younger brother of the fourth, fifth, and sixth Earls
Ferrers.

Younger Branches (extinct). Shirley, of Wiston, Preston,
West-Grinstead, and Ote-Hall, all in Sussex, and all descended from
the second marriage of Ralph Shirley, Esq., and Elizabeth Blount;
which Ralph died in 1466. All these families are presumed to be
extinct on the death of Sir William Warden Shirley, Baronet, in
1815.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, ed. 2, vol. i. p. 621; Nichols's History
of Leicestershire, vol. iii. pt. ii. p. 704-727; Stemmata
Shirleiana, pr. pr. 4to. 1841; and Brydges's Collins, vol. iv. p.
85.

ARMS.--_Paly of six, or and azure, a quarter ermine_. The more
ancient coat was, _Paly of six, or and sable_, as appears by the
seal of "Sir Sewallis de Ethindon, Knight," with the legend, "Sum
scutum de auro et nigro senis ductibus palatum," engraved in
Dugdale's Warwickshire, and in Upton de Studio Militari. Indeed Sir
Ralph Shirley bore it as late as the reign of Edward II; see
Nicolas's Roll of that date, p. 73. Sir Hugh de Shirley bore the
present coat (Roll of Richard II.): so did his father Sir Thomas,
and his great-grandfather Sir James, as appears by their several
seals engraved in Upton, &c.

Present Representative, Evelyn Philip Shirley, Esq., late M. P. for
South Warwickshire.

  * The Iretons of Little Ireton, in the county of Derby, extinct in
    1711, were in fact the elder line of the family, sprung from
    Henry, eldest son of Fulcher, and elder brother of Sewallis de
    Shirley.




BRACEBRIDGE OF ATHERSTONE.


[Illustration] In the time of King John, the venerable family of
Bracebridge, originally of Bracebridge in Lincolnshire, acquired by
marriage in the person of Peter de Bracebridge with Amicia, daughter
of Osbert de Arden and Maud, and granddaughter of Turchill de
Warwick, the manor of Kingsbury in this county, an ancient seat of
the Mercian Kings, and inherited by Turchill, called the last Saxon
Earl of Warwick, with his second wife Leverunia. The descendants of
which Peter and Amicia had their principal seat at Kingsbury till
about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, when it was sold,
and the Atherstone estate purchased. "Kinisbyri is a fair manor
place," writes Leland, in his Itinerary, "and lordship of 140 li.;
one Bracebridge is lord of it; it is in Warwikshir." At Bracebridge,
on the river Witham, near Lincoln, the original seat of the family,
so called it is supposed from the two bridges which still exist
there, a grant of free warren was obtained in the 29th of Edward I.,
which was still retained by Thomas Bracebridge, Esq. who died in
1567.

The Bracebridges represent the Holtes of Aston, near Birmingham,
and, through that ancient family, the Breretons of Cheshire.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. ii. p. 1057-1061; Nichols's
Leicestershire, vol. iii. part ii. p. 1145; for Holte, see Dugdale's
Warwickshire, vol. ii. p. 871, and Davidson's History of the Holtes
of Aston, fol. 1854; for Brereton, see Ormerod's Cheshire, vol. iii.
pt. 31.

ARMS.--_Vair, argent and sable, a fess gules_. This coat was borne
by Sir John de Brasbruge, de co. Lincoln, in the reign of Edward II.
and again by Monsire de Brasbridge in those of Edward III. and
Richard III. (Rolls).

Present Representative, Charles Holte Bracebridge, Esq.




COMPTON OF COMPTON WYNIATE, MARQUESS OF NORTHAMPTON 1812; EARL 1618;
BARON 1572.


[Illustration] Although the early part of the pedigree of the
Comptons is not entirely without doubt, we may conclude that the
family was seated at Compton, called "in le Windgate," soon after
the Conquest. Arnulphus de Compton and Osbertus de Compton were
living in the 16th of Henry II., but Philip de Compton is the first
of the name who certainly held the manor of Compton, in the fifth of
John. Here the family continued resident for many ages; but its
importance arose in a great degree from Sir William Compton having
been brought up with Henry Duke of York, afterwards Henry VIII., and
from the marriage of his great-grandson, the first Earl of
Northampton, with the City Heiress of Spencer.

The Comptons were pre-eminently distinguished for loyalty during the
Civil Wars of the seventeenth century.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 549; and Brydges's Collins,
vol. iii. p. 223.

ARMS.--_Sable, a lion of England or between three esquire's helmets
argent_. A former coat, borne by Thomas de Comptone, apparently
about the reign of Edward III., was a chevron charged with three
fleurs-de-lis. This is proved by a silver seal dug up at Compton in
the year 1845; and the same arms are still to be traced on an
ancient mutilated monument of a knight with collar of S.S., supposed
to represent Sir Thomas de Compton, in the church of Compton
Wyniate. The three helmets were afterwards adopted, and appear to
have been the arms of a distinct family, the Comptons of Fenny
Compton in this county; to which Henry VIII. gave the lion as an
augmentation; at the same time, according to the custom of the
period, was added a quartering to the family arms, viz.: _Argent, a
chevron azure, within a border vert bezantee_.

Present Representative, Charles Douglas Compton, 3rd Marquess of
Northampton.




CHETWYND OF GRENDON, BARONET 1795.


[Illustration] The younger, but, in England, the only remaining
branch of a very ancient family, denominated from Chetwynd, in
Shropshire, and of Baxterly, in this county, in the 37th of Henry
III. Sir William Chetwind was the first of the name seated at
Grendon, in the 39th of Edward III., his mother being daughter and
coheir of Sir Ralph de Grendon; but Ingestre, in Staffordshire,
which came from the heiress of Mutton, was the principal seat of the
Chetwinds, which was eventually carried by an heiress into the
Talbot family (now Earl of Shrewsbury).

Elder Branch. The Viscounts Chetwynd of Ireland (1717).

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. ii. p. 1101; Erdeswick's
Staffordshire, ed. 1844, p. 61; Eyton's Shropshire, viii. p. 81; and
Archdall's Lodge, vol. v. p. 148.

ARMS.--_Azure, a chevron between three mullets or_. In the reign of
Edward II. Sir John Chetwind bore, _Azure, a chevron or_, without
the mullets; the present coat was borne by others of the family in
the reigns of Edward III. and Richard II. (Rolls.)

Present Representative, Sir George Chetwynd, third Baronet.




FEILDING OF NEWNHAM PADDOX, EARL OF DENBIGH 1622.


[Illustration] The princely extraction of this noble family from the
counts of Hapsburg in Germany is well known; its ancestor,
Galfridus, or Geffrey, came into England in the twelfth year of the
reign of Henry III., and received large possessions from that
monarch. The name is derived from Rin_felden_, in Germany, where,
and at Lauffenburg, were the patrimonial possessions of the house of
Hapsburg. Newnham was in possession of John Fildying in the twelfth
of Henry VI., inherited from his mother Joan, daughter and heir of
William Prudhome.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 86; Brydges's Collins' vol.
iii. p. 265; and Nichols's Leicestershire, vol. iv. pt. i. p. 273,
for the history of this illustrious family, compiled by Nathaniel
Wanley about the year 1670.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a fess azure three fusils or_. The present coat
was borne in the reigns of Edward III. and Richard II., as appears
by Seals of those dates.

Present Representative, Rudolph William Basil Feilding, 8th Earl of
Denbigh.




STAUNTON OF LONGBRIDGE.


[Illustration] This family is stated by Thomas, in his additions to
Dugdale's Warwickshire, to be a branch of the Stauntons of Staunton,
in the county of Nottingham, an ancient house which is traced to the
Conquest, and was lately represented by Sir George Staunton, Baronet
of Ireland 1785, extinct 1859. The first of the line seated in
Warwickshire was Thomas Staunton, in the 39th of Henry VI., 1461.
The parent house, existing in the male line, until the year 1688, at
Staunton, in Nottinghamshire, held their lands by tenure of
_Castle-Guard_, by keeping and defending a tower in the Castle of
Belvoir, to this day called Staunton Tower. There is an ancient
custom also that the chief of the house of Staunton should present
the key of this tower to any of the Royal Family who may honour
Belvoir with their presence.

Younger Branch. Staunton of Wolverton, in this county, settled there
in the eighteenth of Elizabeth; extinct in the last century.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. ii. p. 665; Thoroton's
Nottinghamshire, p. 157; and for the poetical pedigree of this
house, Ib. p. 159; the monuments at p. 164; see also "Memoirs of the
Life and Family of the late Sir G. L. Staunton, Bart." pr. pr. 8vo.
1833.

ARMS.--_Argent, two chevrons within a border engrailed sable_.
Founded on the coat of Albany Lord of Belvoir, who bore, _Or, two
chevrons and a border gules_. The elder line of Staunton sometimes
omitted the border; see the tombs in the church of Staunton.

Present Representative, John Staunton, Esq.




FERRERS OF BADDESLEY-CLINTON.

[Illustration] The sole remains of what was perhaps during the
middle ages the most powerful Norman family in England. Illustrious
both for the antiquity of race, the former political consequence,
and the splendour of connection of the various branches, of which
the forfeited Earls of Derby, and De Ferrariis, or Ferrers, were the
chiefs. Descended from Henry de Feriers at the time of the Conquest,
who held in chief 210 lordships in fourteen counties of England,
besides the castle and borough of Tutbury, in Staffordshire, the
principal seat of the earldom.

The Baddesley-Clinton line was founded by Sir Edward Ferrers, (son
of Sir Henry, who was second son of Thomas Ferrers, of Tamworth
Castle, in this county,) by his marriage with Constantia, daughter
and heiress of Nicholas Brome, of Baddesley. He died in 1535.

After the forfeiture of the Earldom of Derby, in the reign of Henry
III., and the vast possessions attached to it, the Castle of
Chartley, in Staffordshire, inherited from Agnes, daughter and
coheir of Ranulph, Earl of Chester, became the seat of the principal
male line, extinct on the death of William Lord Ferrers of Chartley
in the 28th of Henry VI. The representation of the family thereupon
devolved on the Ferrers's of Tamworth, sprung from the house of
Groby, who were founded by William, younger brother of the last Earl
of Derby: and on the decease of John Ferrers, of Tamworth, Esq. in
1680, the present family of Baddesley-Clinton succeeded as chief of
this illustrious house.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. ii. p. 971, for
Baddesley-Clinton, where however will be found no engravings
of the monuments of the Ferrers's, "because," says Dugdale, "so
frugall a person is the present heir of the family, now (1656)
residing here, as that he refusing to contribute anything towards
the charge thereof, they are omitted." For Ferrers of Chartley, and
the Earls of Derby, see Sir O. Mosley's History of Tutbury, 8vo.
1832; and Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. ii. p. 1089; and for Ferrers
of Tamworth, the same, p. 1135.

ARMS.--_Gules, seven mascles or, a canton ermine_. This was the coat
of Quinci, Earl of Winchester, from whom the Ferrers of Groby were
descended, the canton being added for difference. The original coat
assigned to the first Earls of Derby, was, _Argent, six horseshoes
sable_; afterwards, _Vair or and gules, within a bordure of
horseshoes_, was used. The Chartley line bore only, _Vair, or and
gules_, which was latterly also borne by Ferrers of Tamworth. The
Quinci coat was used by William de Ferrers at Carlaverock in 1300.
(See the Roll.)

Present Representative, Marmion Edward Ferrers, Esq.




MORDAUNT OF WALTON, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] Turvey in Bedfordshire was the principal seat in
England of this noble Norman family, descended from Osbert le
Mordaunt, who came over from Normandy with William the Conqueror,
and received a grant of the lordship of Radwell in that county. In
1529, John Mordaunt, the representative of the family, was summoned
to Parliament by writ as Baron Mordaunt of Turvey. His
great-great-grandson was created Earl of Peterborough in 1628; which
title, together with the elder line of the family, became
extinct on the decease of Charles-Henry Mordaunt, fifth Earl, in
1814.

The present family descend from Robert, son of William Mordaunt of
Hemsted, in Essex, who was second son of William Mordaunt of Turvey,
living in the 11th of Henry IV., which Robert married Barbara,
daughter of John le Strange, of Massingham-Parva in Norfolk, and of
Walton-D'Eivile, in this county, which since the 32nd year of Henry
VIII., 1549-50, has remained the inheritance of their descendants.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 577: Parkins's continuation
of Blomefield's Norfolk, vol. iv. p. 643; and that very rare volume
compiled by order of the second Earl of Peterborough, called
"Halstead's Genealogies," fo. 1685, privately printed.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three estoiles sable_.

Present Representative, Sir Charles Mordaunt, 10th. Baronet, M. P.
for South Warwickshire.




BIDDULPH OF BIRDINGBURY, BARONET 1654.


[Illustration] This ancient family, originally of Biddulph, in the
northern parts of Staffordshire, is traced to Ormus, mentioned in
the Domesday Survey. He was, it is said, of Norman descent, and is
supposed to have married the Saxon heiress of Biddulph, from whence
the name was afterwards assumed. The elder line terminated on the
death of' John Biddulph, Esq. of Biddulph and of Burton in Sussex,
in the year 1835. The Birdingbury branch, now representing this
venerable house, was founded by Symon, second son of Richard
Biddulph, of Biddulph, in the time of Henry VIII., whose descendant,
another Symon, purchased Birdingbury in 1687. The family were
eminently loyal during the Civil Wars, when the ancient seat of
Biddulph was destroyed by the Cromwellians about 1643-4.

Younger Branch. Biddulph of Ledbury, in the county of Hereford,
descended from Anthony, younger brother of the first Baronet.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 324; Shaw's History of
Staffordshire, vol. i. p. 352; Erdeswick's Staffordshire, ed. 1844,
p. 8; Ward's History of the Borough of Stoke-upon-Trent, p. 277; and
Wotton's Baronetage, vol. iii. p. 442.

ARMS.--_Vert, an eagle displayed argent, armed and langued gules_.
Argent, three soldering-irons sable, is also said to have been borne
by the Biddulphs.

Present Representative, Sir Theophilus William Biddulph, 7th
Baronet.




SKIPWITH OF HARBOROUGH, BARONET 1622 (FORMERLY OF NEWBOLD HALL).


[Illustration] The name is derived from Skipwith, in the East Riding
of Yorkshire, and was first borne by Patrick, living in the reign of
Henry I., who was second son of Robert de Estotevile, Baron of
Cottingham in the reign of William the Conqueror. In the reign of
Henry III. the Skipwiths removed into Lincolnshire, and were seated
at Beckeby and Ormesby, in that county; a younger son of Sir
William Skipwith, of Ormesby, who died in 1587, was of Prestwould,
in Leicestershire. He was the ancestor of the Skipwiths of Newbold
Hall, created Baronet in 1670, extinct in 1790, and of the present
family, who for five generations were of Virginia, in America, where
the grandfather of the present Baronet was born.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 84; Nichols's Leicestershire,
vol. iii. pt. i. p. 368; and Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p. 536,

ARMS.--_Argent, three bars pules, in chief a greyhound courant
sable_.

Present Representative, Sir Peyton Estoteville Skipwith, 10th
Baronet.




+Gentle.+


SHUCKBURGH OF SHUCKBURGH, BARONET 1660.


[Illustration] The antiquity of this family need not be doubted,
although the lineal descent, as Dugdale avouches, is not very plain.
William de Suckeberge is presumed to be the first who assumed the
name, from Shuckborough Superior, in this county; he was living in
the third of John. The pedigree is deduced by Baker, in his History
of Northamptonshire, from John de Shuckburgh, living in the first of
Edward III. In the seventh of Henry V. his great-grandson William is
ranked amongst those knights and esquires of this county who bore
ancient arms from their ancestors. It was to Richard Shuckburgh,
head of the family in 1642, that the remarkable incident happened
which is related by Dugdale. Charles I. having met him hunting
with his hounds a day or two before the battle of Edgehill, "Who is
that," said the King, "hunting so merrily, while I am about to fight
for my crown and dignity?" He was knighted the next day, and proved
his loyalty at the battle of Edge-hill. He died in 1656, and his son
was rewarded with the Baronetcy on the Restoration.

Younger Branch. Shuckburgh of Downton, Wiltshire, descended from
Charles, fourth son of the first Baronet.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 309; Baker's
Northamptonshire, vol. i. p. 371; Wotton's Baronetage, vol. iii. p.
76; and Hoare's Modern Wiltshire, vol. iv. p. 34.

ARMS.--_Sable, a chevron between three mullets pierced argent_. This
coat is evidently founded on the arms of Danvers, the Norman family
under whom the Shuckburghs held: it has been fondly assumed that the
mullets are allusive to the astroites found in the ploughed fields
at Shuckburgh.

Present Representative, Sir Francis Shuckburgh, 8th Baronet.




THROCKMORTON OF COUGHTON, BARONET 1642.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Throcmorton, in the parish
of Fladbury, in the county of Worcester, where John de Trockemerton,
the supposed ancestor of this family, was living about the year
1200. From this John descended, after many generations, another
"John Throkmerton," who was, according the Leland, "the first setter
up of his name to any worship in Throkmerton village, the which was
at that tyme neither of his inheritance or purchase, but as a
thing taken of the Sete of Wircester in farme, bycause he bore the
name of the lordeship and village. This John was Under-Treasurer of
England about the tyme of Henry V.;" and married Elianor, daughter
and coheir of Guido de la Spine, and thus became possessed of
Coughton, in the parish of Hadley, in this county, which has
continued the principal seat of the family, of whom the most
remarkable was Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, ambassador in France, in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who died in 1570.

Younger Branches (now extinct), were the Throckmortons of Stoughton
and Ellington, in Huntingdonshire, [for the latter see Camden's
Visitation of that county in 1613, printed by the Camden Society in
1849, p. 123;] and the Carews of Bedington, in Surrey, Baronet 1714,
extinct 1764; descended in the male line from Sir Nicholas, younger
son of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, and Anne, daughter of Sir Nicholas
Carew, Knt.; see Wotton's Baronetage, vol. ii. pi 351, and vol. iv.
p. 159; Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. ii. pp. 749 and 819; Nash's
Worcestershire, vol. i. p. 452; Leland's Itinerary, vol. iv. p. 16;
and for the poetical life of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, see Peck's
Memoirs of Milton.

ARMS.--_Gules, on a chevron argent three bars gemelles sable_.

Present Representative, Sir Nicholas William Throckmorton, 9th
Baronet.




SHELDON OF BRAILES.


[Illustration] The descent of this family from the ancient house of
Sheldon, of Sheldon, in this county, is a matter of doubt, but
admitted by Dugdale to be not improbable. It appears to be proved
that the Sheldons are descended from John Sheldon, of Abberton, in
Worcestershire, in the reign of Henry IV. Nash, in his History of
that county, carries the pedigree two descents higher, viz., to
Richard Sheldon of Rowley, in the county of Stafford, whose grandson
John was of the same place in the fourth of Edward IV. The manor of
Beoly, in Worcestershire, was purchased of Richard Neville Lord
Latimer by William Sheldon in the same reign, and continued till the
destruction of the mansion-house by fire in the Civil Wars of the
seventeenth century, the principal seat of the family, who were
connected with Warwickshire by the marriage of William Sheldon, Esq.
with Mary, daughter and coheir of William Willington, of Barcheston,
Esq., in the reign of Henry VIII. It was this William Sheldon who
purchased the manor of Weston, in the parish of Long-Compton, in
this county, and here his son Ralph built "_a very fair house_" in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth; but these estates have both, within
the memory of man, passed from this ancient family, who still
possess considerable properly at Brailes, purchased by William
Sheldon in the first of Edward VI.

Younger branches of the Sheldons were formerly of Abberton,
Childswicombe, Broadway, and Spechley, in Worcestershire. See
Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 584; and Nash's Worcestershire,
vol. i. pp. 65 and 144.

ARMS.--_Sable, a fess between three sheldrakes argent_.

Present Representative, Henry James Sheldon, Esq.




GREGORY OF STYVECHALL.


[Illustration] This family is traced to John Gregory, Lord of the
manors of Freseley and Asfordby, in the county of Leicester, who
married Maud, daughter of Sir Roger Moton, of Peckleton, knight; his
son, Richard Gregory, of the same places, died in the year 1292.
Arthur Gregory, Esquire, the representative of this ancient family,
was seated at Styvechall, within the county of the city of Coventry,
of which his father, Thomas, died seized in the sixteenth of
Elizabeth.

See Nichols's Leicestershire, vol. iii. pt. i. p. 19; and Dugdale's
Warwickshire, vol. i. p. 202.

ARMS.--_Or, two bars and in chief a lion passant azure_.

Present Representative, Arthur Francis Gregory, Esq.




GREVILLE OF WARWICK CASTLE, EARL BROOKE 1746, AND EARL OF WARWICK
1759; BARON 1620-1.


[Illustration] This family was founded by the wool-trade in the
fourteenth century by William Grevel, "+the flower of the wool
merchants of the whole realm of England,+" who died and was buried
at Campden, in Gloucestershire, in 1401. He it was who purchased
Milcote, in this county, long the seat of the elder line of this
family, who, after a succession of crimes, the particulars of which
may be seen in Dugdale's Warwickshire, became extinct in the
reign of James I. Fulke, second son of Sir Edward Greville of
Milcote, who died in the 20th of Henry VIII., having married
Elizabeth, one of the daughters and coheiress of Edward Willoughby,
only son of Robert Willoughby, Lord Brooke, became possessed of
Beauchamp's Court, in the parish of Alcester, inherited from her
grandmother Elizabeth, the eldest of the daughters and coheirs of
the last Lord Beauchamp of Powyke. This Fulke Greville was
grandfather of the more celebrated Sir Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke,
"servant to Queen Elizabeth, Counsellor to King James, and friend to
Sir Philip Sidney," who died in 1628. "The fanatic Brooke," killed
at Lichfield Close, was his cousin and successor, and ancestor of
the present family. The Castle of Warwick was granted to Sir Fulke
Greville by James I. in the second year of his reign.

Younger Branch. Greville of North Myms Place, in the county of
Hertford, and of Westmeath, in Ireland, descended from Algernon,
second son of Fulke 5th Lord Brooke.

See Leland's Itinerary, vol. iv. pt. i. fol. 16, vol. vi. fol. 19;
Dugdale's Warwickshire, vol. ii. pp. 706, 766; Brydges's Collins,
vol. iv. p. 330; and Edmondson's Account of the Greville Family,
8vo. 1766.

ARMS.--_Sable, on a cross engrailed or, five pellets within a border
engrailed of the second_. The present coat, with the addition of a
mullet in the first quarter, was borne by William Grevil, of
Campden, as appears by his brass, still in good preservation; his
son John differenced his arms with ten annulets, in lieu of the five
pellets; both were omitted by the Grevilles of Milcote.

Present Representative, George Guy Greville, 4th Earl of
Warwick.




WESTMORLAND.


+Knightly.+


LOWTHER OF LOWTHER-CASTLE, EARL OF LONSDALE 1807; BARON 1797;
BARONET 1764.


[Illustration] Eminently a knightly family, traced by Brydges to Sir
Gervase de Lowther, living in the reign of Henry III. Other
authorities make Sir Hugh de Lowther, knight of the shire for this
county, in the 28th of Edward I., the first recorded ancestor; his
great-grandson was at Agincourt in 1415. There have been three
principal branches of this family, the first descended from Sir John
Lowther, created a Baronet of Nova Scotia in 1640, who was
grandfather of the first Viscount Lonsdale (1696), extinct on the
death of the third Viscount in 1750. The second family sprung from
Richard, third son of Sir John Lowther; and the third and present
family descended from William, third son of a former Sir John
Lowther, of Lowther, who died in 1637.

Younger Branch. Lowther of Swillington, in the county of York,
Baronet 1824, descended from John, second son of Sir William
Lowther, who died in 1788.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. v. p. 695; Burn's Westmorland, vol. i.
p. 428; Whitaker's Leeds, vol. i. p. 281; and Wotton's Baronetage,
vol. ii. p. 302.

ARMS.--_Or, six annulets sable_, and borne by Monsire Louther, in
the reign of Edward III. (Roll )

Present Representative, William Lowther, 2nd Earl of Lonsdale.




STRICKLAND OF SIZERGH.


[Illustration] Descended from Walter de Stirkland, Knight, so called
from the pasture-ground of the young cattle, called _stirks_ or
steers, in the parish of Morland, in this county; who was living in
the reign of Henry III. A good account of this family, derived from
original evidences, is given by Burn.

Sizergh, in the parish of Helsington, appears to have belonged to
the Stricklands in the reign of Edward I. Sir Walter de Strickland
had licence to empark there in the ninth of Edward III. During the
civil wars of the seventeenth century the head of this house was
loyal, while Walter, son of Sir William Strickland, of Boynton,
Baronet 1641, was one of Cromwell's pretended House of Peers. The
Stricklands of Boynton are supposed to be a younger branch of the
house of Sizergh. The Stricklands called Standish, of Standish, in
the county of Lancaster, represent the elder line, the present Mr.
Standish being the eldest son of the late Thomas Strickland, of
Sizergh, Esq.

See Burn's Westmorland, vol. i. p. 87; and Whitaker's Richmondshire,
vol. ii. p. 333.

ARMS.--_Sable, three escallops within a border engrailed argent_.
The present coat, but without the border, was borne by Walter de
Strykelande, in the reign of Richard II. Another coat, used in the
reign of Edward II. was _Argent, two bars and a quarter gules_.
(Rolls.) The Stricklands of Boynton bear, _Gules, a chevron or
between three crosses patée argent, on a canton ermine a stag's head
erased sable_.

Present Representative, Walter Strickland, Esq.




FLEMING OF RYDAL; BARONET 1705.


[Illustration] Michael le Fleming, living in the reign of William
the Conqueror, is the ancestor of this ancient family, originally
seated in Cumberland and at Gleston, in Furness, in Lancashire.
Isabel, daughter of Sir John de Lancastre, living in the sixth of
Henry VI., having married Sir Thomas le Fleming, of Coniston,
Knight, seated the Flemings at Rydal, ever since the residence of
the family.

See Burn's Westmorland, vol. i. p. 150; and Wotton's Baronetage,
vol. iv. p. 105.

ARMS.--_Gules, fretty argent_. The present coat, called "The arms of
Hoddleston," with a label vert, was borne by John Fleming de
Westmerland in the reign of Edward III. (Roll.) A more ancient coat,
according to Wotton, was a _Fleur-de-lis, within a roundell_.

Present Representative, Sir Michael le Fleming, 7th Baronet.




+Gentle.+


WYBERGH OF CLIFTON.


[Illustration] In the thirty-eighth year of the reign of Edward
III., William de Wybergh, of Saint Bee's, in Cumberland, became
possessed of the manor of Clifton, in marriage with Elianor, only
daughter of Gilbert D'Engayne, whose family had held it from the
time of Henry II. It has ever since continued the seat and residence
of their descendants. In Cromwell's days the Wyberghs had the honour
to be considered delinquents; and in the succeeding century, in
1715, the head of the house was taken prisoner in consequence of his
allegiance to the house of Hanover.

Younger Branch. Lawson of Brayton, Baronet 1831.

See Burn's Westmorland, vol. i. p. 417.

ARMS.--_Sable, three bars or, in chief two estoiles of the last_.
Sometimes I find two mullets in chief, and one in base, used in
place of the estoiles.

Present Representative, William Wybergh, Esq.




WILTSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


SEYMOUR OF MAIDEN-BRADLEY; DUKE OF SOMERSET 1546-7, BARONET 1611.


[Illustration] This great historical family is of Norman origin,
descended from Roger de Seimor, or Seymour, who lived in the reign
of Henry I. Woundy, Penhow, and Seymour Castle, all in the county of
Monmouth, (the last sold in the reign of Henry VIII.,) were ancient
seats of the family, who we find in the fourteenth century resident
in Somersetshire, after the marriage of Sir Roger Seymour with the
coheiress of Beauchamp of Hache; his grandson married the heiress of
Esturmi or Sturmey of Chadham, in this county, and thus first became
connected with Wiltshire. Maiden-Bradley belonged to Sir Edward
Seymour, the elder, the eldest surviving son of the Protector
Somerset by his first wife, and the ancestor of the present family,
who in 1750, on the death of the seventh Duke of Somerset, succeeded
to the Dukedom, which by special entail went first to the
descendants of the Protector by his second wife, until the
extinction of her male line in that year.

Younger Branches. Seymour, of Knoyle, in this county, descended from
Francis, next brother of Edward eighth Duke of Somerset, and second
son of Sir Edward Seymour, Baronet, of Maiden-Bradley, who died in
1741. Seymour Marquess of Hertford, (1793,) descended from
Francis, son of Sir Edward Seymour, Bart., who died in 1708, and his
second wife, Letitia, daughter of Francis Popham.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. i. p. 144, vol. ii. p. 560; Westcote's
Devonshire Pedigrees, p. 479; and Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p.
86.

ARMS.--_Quarterly,_ 1 _and_ 4, _Or, on a pile gules between six
fleurs-de-lis azure three lions of England;_ 2 _and_ 3, _Gules, two
wings conjoined in lure of the first, the points downwards_. The
wings, the original coat, was borne by Sir Roger de Seimor in the
23rd Henry III., as appears by his seal, with the legend "Sigill'
Rogeri de Seimor." (Collins.) The first quarter was granted by Henry
VIII. as an augmentation in consequence of his marrying Jane,
daughter of Sir John Seymour.

Present Representative, Edward Adolphus Seymour, K.G. 13th Duke of
Somerset.




ARUNDELL OF WARDOUR, BARON ARUNDELL OF WARDOUR 1605.


[Illustration] A Norman family, which for centuries has flourished
in the West of England, traced by Dugdale to "Rogerius Arundel,"
mentioned in Domesday. "The most diligent inspection, however,"
writes Hoare in his Wiltshire, "of an immense collection of ancient
charters, deeds, and instruments of all kinds, and from the earliest
periods of documentary evidence, among the archives of Wardour
Castle, have not enabled us to trace the filiation of this House
from the said Rogerius." Reinfred de Arundell, who lived at the
end of the reign of Henry III. stands therefore at the head of the
pedigree as given by Hoare. Gilbert in his "Survey of Cornwall," is
inclined to believe the name to be derived from Arundel in Sussex,
and refers to "Yorke's Union of Honour." He says the family came
into Cornwall by a match with the heiress of Trembleth about the
middle of the twelfth century. Lanherne, in that county, was in the
fourteenth century their principal seat. The Castle of Wardour was
purchased by Sir Thomas Arundell from Sir Fulke Greville in 1547.

Camden, Carew, and Leland unite in recording the hospitality and
honourable demeanour of this family, in all relations of social
life, and state that from the pre-eminence of their ample
possessions they were popularly designated "The Great Arundells."

See Coll. Topog. et Genealog., vol. iii. p. 389; Leland's Itin.,
vol. iii. fol. 2; Gilbert's Cornwall, vol. i. p. 470; Brydges's
Collins, vol. vii. p. 40; and Hoare's Wiltshire, vol. iii. pt. i. p.
175, &c.

ARMS.--_Sable, six martlets argent_. The martlets, or _hirondelles_,
may be considered an early instance of Canting Heraldry.

Present Representative, John Francis Arundell, 12th Baron Arundell
of Wardour.




WYNDHAM OF DINTON.


[Illustration] The sole remaining branch in the male line of this
ancient family, said to be of Saxon origin, and descended from
"Ailwardus" of Wymondham, or Wyndham, in Norfolk, living soon after
the Norman Conquest. Felbrigge, in the same county, was for many
ages the seat of the Wyndhams, and afterwards Orchard, in
Somersetshire, which came from the co-heiress of Sydenham. The
present family, who succeeded to the representation on the death of
the fourth and last Earl of Egremont, in 1845, descend from Sir
Wadham, ninth son of Sir John Wyndham, of Orchard and Felbrigge.
They were seated at Norrington, in this county, about 1660. Dinton
was purchased in 1689.

See Parkins's Continuation of Blomefield's Norfolk, vol. iv. p. 309;
Hoare's Wiltshire, vol. iii. pt. i. 108, and vol. iv. p. 93;
Hutchins's History of Dorset, vol. iii. p. 330; Wotton's Baronetage,
vol. iii. p. 346; and Brydges's Collins, vol. iv. p. 401.

ARMS.--_Azure, a chevron between three lion's heads erased or_.

Present Representative, William Wyndham, Esq.




MALET OF WILBURY, BARONET 1791.


[Illustration] A noble Norman family of great antiquity, who were of
Baronial rank immediately after the Conquest, descended from William
Baron Malet, whose grandson, another William Baron Malet, was
expelled by Henry I. The elder branch of the family were long seated
at Enmore, in the county of Somerset; but the ancestors of the
present family, whose baronetcy was conferred for services in the
East Indies, at Corypole and Wolleigh, in the county of Devon, and
at Pointington and St. Audries, in Somersetshire. Wilbury was
purchased in 1803.

See Hoare's Modern Wiltshire, vol. i. pt. ii. p. 106; Collinson's
History of Somersetshire, vol. i. p. 90; and the Gentleman's
Magazine for 1799, p. 117.

ARMS.--_Azure, three escallops or_. Robert Malet bore _Argent, three
fermaux sable_, in the reign of Edward I. as appears by Sir R. St.
George's Roll, Harl. MS. 6137.

Present Representative, Sir Alexander Charles Malet, 2nd
Baronet.




+Gentle.+


CODRINGTON OF WROUGHTON.


[Illustration] The name is local, from Codrington, in the parish of'
Wapley, in the county of Gloucester, where this family was seated as
early as the reign of Henry IV. John Codrington, Esquire,
Standard-bearer to Henry V. in his wars in France, was the direct
ancestor; he died in 1475, at the age, it is said, of 112; his
monument remains at Wapley.

Codrington remained in the family till 1753, when it passed with an
heiress to the Bamfyldes of Poltimore, and has since been
re-purchased by the present owner of Dodington. Didmarton, also in
Gloucestershire, which came by marriage in 1570, and was afterwards
sold, and latterly Wroughton, in this county, became the family
seats.

Two younger branches have been seated at Dodington; the first,
descended from Thomas Codrington, brother of John the
Standard-bearer, long settled at Frampton-on-Severn in
Gloucestershire, bought Dodington in the time of Queen Elizabeth and
sold it at the beginning of the eighteenth century to the ancestor
of the present family, Codrington of Dodington, in the county of
Gloucester, Baronet 1721, descended from Christopher, second son of
Robert Codrington, who died in 1618.

See Atkyns's Gloucestershire, pp. 204 and 391; Rudder's
Gloucestershire, p. 787; and Wotton's Baronetage, vol. iv. p. 201.
Corrected by the information of Mr. R. H. Codrington.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess embattled counter-embattled sable, fretty
gules, between three lioncels passant of the third_. The fretty is
sometimes omitted by the present Dodington branch. The ancient coat
was simply, _Argent, a fess between three lioncels passant gules_,
still used by the former family of Dodington, now settled in
Somersetshire. The embattlement and fret was an augmentation granted
to the Standard-bearer in the 19th of Henry VI.; and again two years
before he died he received a further acknowledgement of his support
of the Red Rose in a coat to be borne quarterly, _Vert, on a bend
argent three roses gules, in the sinister quarter a dexter hand
couped of the second_.

Present Representative, William Wyndham Codrington, Esq.




THYNNE OF LONGLEATE, MARQUESS OF BATH 1789; VISCOUNT WEYMOUTH 1682;
BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] The name is derived from the mansion or inn at
Stretton, in the county of Salop, to which the freehold lands of the
family, with various detached copyholds, were attached. The original
name was Botfield, so called from Botfield in Stretton; the first on
record being William de Bottefeld, sub-forester of Shirlet, in
Shropshire, in 1255. About the time of Edward IV. the elder line of
the family assumed the name of Thynne, otherwise Botfeld, which was
borne for three generations before the time of Sir John Thynne, the
purchaser of Longleate, who died in 1580, the ancestor of the
present family.

Younger Branch represented by the late Beriah Botfield of
Norton Hall, in the county of Northampton, and Decker Hill, co.
Salop, descended from John, second son of Thomas Bottefeld, of
Bottefeld, living in 1439.

See the Topographer and Genealogist, vol. iii. p. 468; and the
Stemmata Botevilliana, (privately printed,) second edition, 1858,
4to.

ARMS.--_Barry of ten or and sable_. The younger branch, who retained
the name of Botfield, bore _Barry of twelve or and sable_.

Present Representative, John Alexander Thynne, 4th Marquess of
Bath.




WORCESTERSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


ACTON OF WOLVERTON.


[Illustration] A junior branch of a very ancient family, said indeed
by Habington, the Worcestershire antiquary, to be of Saxon origin,
and formerly seated at Acton, properly _Oakton_, in the parish of
Ombersley. Elias de Acton, of Ombersley, occurs in the third of
Henry III. He was the ancestor of various branches of the Actons
resident in different parts of this county, at Sutton, Ribbesford,
Elmley-Lovet, Bokelton, and Burton, all of whom now appear to be
extinct, the male line being preserved by the present family,
founded by a younger son of Sir Roger Acton, of Sutton, and the
heiress of Cokesey, about the middle of the seventeenth century.

See Nash's History of Worcestershire, vol. ii. p. 217; and
Blakeway's Sheriffs of Salop, p. 60.

ARMS.--_Gules, a fess within a border engrailed ermine_.

Present Representative, William Joseph Acton, Esq.




LYTTLETON OF FRANKLEY, BARON LYTTLETON 1794; IRISH BARON 1776;
BARONET 1618.


[Illustration] The name is derived from a place in the Vale of
Evesham, where the ancestors of this family in the female line were
seated before the reign of Richard I. Frankley came from an heiress
of that name in the reign of Henry III. In that of Henry V.
Elizabeth, heiress of Sir Thomas Lyttleton, of Frankley, married
Thomas Westcote of Westcote, in the county of Devon, Esquire, "but
the old knight, her father, desirous to perpetuate his name, (and
his purpose failed not,) would not yield consent to the marriage but
upon his son's-in-law assured promise that his son, enjoying his
mother's inheritance, should also take her name, and continue it,
which was justly performed." (Westcote's Devonshire, p. 306.)

Hagley, the principal seat, was purchased in 1564. Mr. John
Lyttleton, the head of this family, was implicated in Lord Essex's
rising in 1600; but his son, Sir Thomas, was right loyal to the
Crown in 1642.

See Leland's Itinerary in Coll. Topog. et Genealog., vol. iii. p.
339; Nash's Worcestershire, vol. i. p. 493; Prince's Worthies of
Devon, ed. 1701, p. 583; Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p. 306; and
Brydges's Collins, vol. viii. p. 316. See also in the Library of the
Society of Antiquaries a genealogical account of this family, in the
handwriting of Dr. Charles Lyttleton, Bishop of Carlisle, No. 151,
4to.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three escallops sable_, borne by
Thomas Lyttelton in the reign of Henry IV. as appears by his seal.

Present Representative, George William Lyttleton, 4th Lord
Lyttleton.




TALBOT OF GRAFTON, EARL OF SHREWSBURY 1442; EARL TALBOT 1784; BARON
1733; EARL OF WATERFORD IN IRELAND 1661.

[Illustration] This great historical family is traced to the
Conquest, Richard Talbot, living at that period, being the first
recorded ancestor. No family in England is more connected with the
history of our country than this noble race; few are more highly
allied. The Marches of Wales appear to be the original seat;
afterwards we find the Talbots in Shropshire, in Staffordshire,
(where their estates were inherited from the Verdons in the time of
the Edwards,) and lastly in Yorkshire, at Sheffield, derived from
the great heiress of Neville Lord Furnival. This was the seat of the
first seven Earls of Shrewsbury, of whom an excellent biographical
account will be found in Hunter's Hallamshire (p. 43). The manor of
Grafton, formerly the estate of the Staffords, was granted by Henry
VII. to Sir Gilbert Talbot in 1486; it afterwards became the seat of
a younger branch, who eventually, on the death of the eighth Earl,
became Earls of Shrewsbury, from whom all the succeeding Earls, to
the decease of Bertram Arthur, 17th Earl of Shrewsbury, in 1856,
were descended. The present and 18th Earl, who is also the 3rd Earl
Talbot, springs from the second marriage of Sir John Talbot of
Albrighton in Shropshire, and of Grafton, in this county, who died
in 1550, and who was grandfather of the 9th and ancestor of the
succeeding Earls.

Younger Branch. Talbot, Baron Talbot of Malahide in Ireland, (1831,)
descended from Richard, second son of Richard Talbot and Maud
Montgomery, the third ancestor of the House of Shrewsbury, who was
living in 1153.

See Nash's Worcestershire, vol. i. p. 158; Brydges's Collins, vol.
iii. p. i.; and the Shrewsbury Peerage Claim before the House of
Lords, 1857.

ARMS.--_Gules, a lion rampant within a border engrailed or_. Borne
by Sir Gilbert Talbot in the reign of Edward II. (Rolls), and said
to be the coat of Rhese ap Griffith, Prince of South Wales. The
ancient arms of Talbot being _Bendy of ten argent and gules_. The
Talbots of Malahide bear the border erminoise instead of or.

Present Representative, Henry John Chetwynd Talbot, 18th Earl of
Shrewsbury, and third Earl Talbot.




WINNINGTON OF STANFORD; BARONET 1755.


[Illustration] Descended from Paul Winnington, living in 1615,
great-grandson of Robert, who was son of Thomas Winnington of the
Birches, in the county of Chester, living in the reign of Henry VII.
This Thomas represented a younger branch of the Winningtons, of
Winnington, in the same county, descended from Robert, son of
Lidulfus de Croxton, who took the name of Winnington in the reign of
Edward I., on his marriage with Margery, daughter and heiress of
Robert de Winnington, living in the fifty-sixth of Henry III.
Stanford, formerly the seat of the Salways, came to the Winningtons
in the early part of the reign of Charles II., on the marriage of
Sir Francis Wilmington and Elizabeth Salway.

See Ormerod's Cheshire, vol. ii. p. 112, vol. iii. pp. 74 and
93; Pedigree privately printed by Sir Thomas Phillipps, from an
original MS. _penes_ Sir Thomas Winnington, Bart.; and Nash's
Worcestershire, vol. ii. p. 368.

ARMS.--_Argent, an inescucheon voided, within an orle of martlets
sable_.

Present Representative, Sir Thomas Edward Winnington, M.P. for
Bewdley, 4th Baronet.




NOEL OF BELL-HALL.


[Illustration] This is the only remaining branch in the male line of
the very ancient family of Noel; of which the Earls of Gainsborough,
created 1681, extinct 1798, represented a junior line. William, the
ancestor of all the Noels, was living in the reign of Henry I., and
was at that period Lord of Ellenhall, in the county of Stafford. In
the time of Henry II., either he or his son founded the Priory of
Raunton, in the same county.

From the Noels of Ellenhall descended a branch of the family seated
at Hilcote, in Staffordshire; an estate which remained with them
until recent times; the father of the present representative, who
was son of Walter Noel, of Hilcote, Esq., having removed to
Bell-Hall, in the parish of Bell-Broughton, in this county.

The Noels of Rutlandshire and Leicestershire were also descended
from the house of Ellenhall.

See Harwood's edition of Erdeswick's Staffordshire, 1844, p. 132 and
Blore's Rutlandshire.

ARMS.--_Or, fretty gules, a canton ermine_.

Present Representative, Charles Noel, Esq.




+Gentle.+


LECHMERE OF HANLEY; BARONET 1818.


[Illustration] A family of great antiquity, said to have migrated
from the Low Countries, and to have received a grant of land called
"Lechmere's Field," in Hanley, from William the Conqueror. The first
in the pedigree is Reginald de Lechm'e de Hanlee, mentioned in a
deed without date. He was father of Adam de Lechmere, who married
Isabella, and was the ancestor of this venerable house, whose
ancient seat at Severn-End, in Hanley, with the exception of a
period of thirty years, has ever since remained in the family.
During the civil wars the Lechmeres were on the side of the
Parliament. A second son, who died without issue in 1727, was raised
to the Peerage in 1721.

Younger Branches. Lechmere of Steeple-Aston, in the county of
Oxford, and Lechmere of Fanhope, in the county of Hereford; also the
Lechmeres (called Patteshalls) of Allensmore, in the same county;
the two last being descended from Sandys, second son of Sir Nicholas
Lechmere, the Judge, who died in 1701.

See Nash's Worcestershire, vol. i. p. 563.

ARMS.--_Gules, a fess and in chief two pelicans or, vulning
themselves proper_.

Present Representative, Sir Edmund Anthony Harley Lechmere, 3rd
Baronet.




SEBRIGHT OF BESFORD; BARONET 1626.


[Illustration] William Sebright, of Sebright, in Much Beddow, in
Essex, living in the reign of Henry II. is the ancestor of this
ancient family, who removed into this county at a very early period,
apparently after the marriage of Mabel Sebright with Katharine,
daughter and heir of Ralph Cowper, of Blakeshall, in the parish of
Wolverly, in which parish the Sebrights possessed lands in the sixth
year of Edward I. Besford was purchased about the reign of
Elizabeth.

See Wotton's Baronetage, vol. ii. p. 8; and Nash's Worcestershire,
vol. i. p. 78.

ARMS.--_Argent, three cinquefoils pierced sable_.

Present Representative, Sir John Gage Saunders Sebright, 9th
Baronet.




BOUGHTON OF ROUSE-LENCH; BARONET 1641.


[Illustration] This is a Warwickshire family of good antiquity,
traced to Robert de Boreton, grandfather of William, who lived in
the reign of Edward III. In that of Henry VI. by the heiress of
Allesley, the family became possessed of the manor of Lawford, which
remained their residence till the murder of Sir Theodosius Boughton,
Baronet, by his brother-in-law Mr. Donnellan, in 1781. After that
event, a younger branch succeeding to the estate and title, Lawford
Hall was pulled down, and the ninth Baronet, on inheriting the
property of the Rouses of Rouse-Lench, in this county, assumed that
name, and made it his seat and residence.

See Dugdale's Warwickshire, second ed., vol. i. p. 98; Nichols's
Leicestershire, vol. iv. pt. i. p. 202; and Wotton's Baronetage,
vol. ii. p. 220.

ARMS.--_Sable, three crescents or_.

Present Representative, Sir Charles Henry Rouse Boughton, 11th
Baronet.




YORKSHIRE.


+Knightly.+


FITZWILLIAM OF WENTWORTH HOUSE; EARL FITZWILLIAM 1746; BARON of
IRELAND 1620.


[Illustration] William FitzGodric, who married Albreda de Lizours,
Lady of Sprotsborough, in this county, and who died before 1195, is
the remote ancestor of this ancient house. Their son, William
FitzWilliam, was seated at Sprotsborough in the reign of Henry II.,
and here the family continued till the extinction of the elder line,
which ended in coheiresses in the reign of Henry VIII.

The rise of this branch of the family must be ascribed to Sir
William Fitzwilliam, Lord Justice, and afterwards Lord Deputy of
Ireland, in the reign of Elizabeth, whose grandson was created Baron
Fitzwilliam in 1620. In the year 1565, Hugh Fitzwilliam collected
whatever evidences could be found touching the descent of the
family. This account, which is in the possession of Earl
Fitzwilliam, is the foundation of most of the histories of this
great family, whose present Yorkshire property came from the
Wentworths through the coheiress of the Marquis of Rockingham in
1744. From this match resulted the Earldom in 1746.

See Hunter's South Yorkshire, vol. i. p. 331, vol. ii. p. 93; and
Brydges's Collins, vol. iv. p. 374.

ARMS.--_Lozengy argent and gules_. The present coat, except that
ermine takes the place of argent, was borne by Thomas Fitzwilliam in
the reign of Henry III. In that of Richard II. William Fitzwilliam
bore the arms as at present used.

Present Representative, William Thomas Spencer
Wentworth-Fitzwilliam, K.G. 6th Earl Fitzwilliam.




SCROPE OF DANBY.


[Illustration] Few families were more important in the fourteenth
and fifteenth centuries than the noble house of Scrope; their
descent is unbroken from the Conquest. Few houses also have been
more distinguished by the number of great offices of honour held
both in Church and State. The Scropes were very early settled in
Yorkshire, Bolton being, from the period of the reign of Edward I.,
their principal seat and Barony. The present family is sprung from a
younger son of Henry, 6th Lord Scrope of Bolton; it was established
at Danby about the middle of the seventeenth century, by marriage
with the heiress of Conyers.

See Whitaker's Richmondshire, vol. i. p. 368; the Scrope and
Grosvenor Roll by Sir Harris Nicolas, 1832, vol. ii. p. 1, and
Poulett-Scrope's History of Castle-Combe; see also Blore's
Rutlandshire, (fol. 1811,) p. 5-8, for full pedigrees of the Scropes
of Bolton and Masham, (Yorkshire,) Cockerington, (Lincolnshire,)
Wormsleigh or Wormsley, (Oxfordshire,) and Castle-Combe,
(Wiltshire,) all now extinct; also the Topographer, vol. iii. p.
181, for Church Notes from Cockerington by Gervase Hollis. Adrian
Scrope the Regicide was of the Wormsley branch.

ARMS.--_Azure, a bend or_. These arms were confirmed by the Court of
Chivalry in 1390, on the celebrated dispute between the houses of
Scrope and Grosvenor, as to the right of bearing them. In the reign
of Edward III. M. William le Scroope bore the present coat, "en le
point de la bend une lyon rampant de purpure." In that of Richard
II., M. Henry le Skrop differenced his arms with a label of three
points argent, M. Thomas le Scrop at the same period charged his
label with an annulet sable, while other members of the family bore
the label ermine charged with bars gules, and lozenges and mullets
ermine. (Rolls of the dates.)

Present Representative, Simon Thomas Scrope, Esq.




GRIMSTON OF GRIMSTON-GARTH.


[Illustration] Sylvester de Grimston, "Standard-bearer and
Chamberlain to William I.," of Grimston, in the parish of Garton, is
claimed as the ancestor of this venerable Norman family, who have
ever since the period of the Conquest resided at the place from
whence the name is derived.

Younger branches of the Grimstons were seated in Norfolk and Essex,
besides the Grimstons of Gorhambury, Earls of Verulam, all now
extinct in the male line.

See Poulson's Holderness, vol. ii. p. 60; Clutterbuck's
Hertfordshire, vol. i. p. 95; Brydges's Collins, vol. viii. p. 209;
and the Scrope and Grosvenor Roll, vol. ii. p. 292. See also
Boutell's Brasses, p. 129, for inscriptions to Sir Edward Grimston
and his son in Rishangles Church, near Eye, in Suffolk.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a fess sable three mullets of six points or,
pierced gules_. This coat was borne by Monsieur Gerrard de Grymston
in the reign of Richard II. (Roll.)

Present Representative, Marmaduke Gerard Grimston, Esq.




WYVILL OF CONSTABLE-BURTON.


[Illustration] This ancient Norman family is said to be descended
from Sir Humphry de Wyvill, who lived at the time of the Conquest,
and whose descendants were seated at Slingsby in this county; the
more modern part of the pedigree begins with Robert Wyvill of Ripon,
whose son was of Little Burton, in the reign of Henry VIII.; from
thence the family migrated to Constable-Burton, about the end of the
reign of James I. During the Civil Wars of the seventeenth century,
the Wyvills were distinguished by their loyalty and consequent
sufferings in the royal cause. An elder line of this family, on whom
the Baronetcy, created in 1611, has descended, is said to be
resident in Maryland, in the United States of America.

See Leland's Itinerary, vol. iv. pl. i.; Whitaker's Richmondshire,
vol. i. p. 322; and Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p. 232.

ARMS.--_Gules, three chevronels interlaced vaire, and a chief or_.
The arms are founded upon the coat of Fitz Hugh, and may be taken as
a proof of high antiquity.

Present Representative, Marmaduke Wyvill, Esq.




TEMPEST OF BROUGHTON.


[Illustration] The pedigree of this ancient family is traced to
Roger, whom Dr. Whitaker calls "Progenitor of this the oldest and
most distinguished of the Craven families now surviving. That this
man was a Norman the name will not permit us to doubt; that he was a
dependant of Roger of Poitou is extremely probable; that he was at
all events possessed of Bracewell (in Craven) early in the reign of
Henry I., is absolutely certain." Dr. Whitaker proceeds to remark on
the name of Tempest, which he says, "whatever was its origin, seems
to have been venerated by the family, as in the two next centuries,
when local appellation became almost universal, they never chose to
part with it." The elder line of the Tempests continued at Bracewell
till the time of Charles I., when Richard Tempest, the last
representative, pulled down the family house, and devised the estate
to a distant relation. The house of Broughton descends directly from
Roger, second son of Sir Peirs Tempest, which Roger married in the
seventh of Henry IV. Katharine daughter and heir of Peter Gilliott
of Broughton, which has been ever since the seat of the Tempests--
"a name never stained with dishonour, but often illustrated with
deeds of arms."

A younger branch was of Tong in this county, descended from Henry,
youngest son of Sir Richard Tempest of Bracewell, Sheriff of
Yorkshire in the 8th of Henry VIII. created Baronet in 1664, extinct
1819.

See Whitaker's Craven, pp. 80, 87.

ARMS.--_Argent, a bend between six storm finches sable_.

Present Representative, Charles Henry Tempest, Esq.




HAMERTON OF HELLIFIELD PEEL.


[Illustration] One of the most ancient families in the North of
England, according to Dr. Whitaker, descended from Richard de
Hamerton, who lived in the twenty-sixth of Henry II., anno 1170.
From Hamerton, the original seat, the family removed to Hellifield,
acquired by marriage with the heiress of Knolle, in the reign of
Edward III. The Castle, or Peel, was built in the reign of Henry
VII. The Hamertons were engaged in the Northern Rebellion in 1537,
and thereby Sir Stephen Hamerton lost his head, and his family the
estate; which was restored to the male representative of the family,
in the third year of Elizabeth, by a munificent settlement made by
John Redman, who had become possessed of the property, and was
related by marriage to the Hamertons. A younger branch was of
Preston-Jacklyn in this county.

See Whitaker's Craven, ed. 1812, p. 124; and Dugdale's Visitation of
Yorkshire, 1665-6, printed by the Surtees Society in 1859, p. 354.

ARMS.--_Argent, three hammers sable_. The Preston-Jacklyn line bore
_Argent, on a chevron between three hammers sable a trefoil slipped
or_.

Present Representative, James Hamerton, Esq.




HOTHAM OF SOUTH DALTON; BARON OF IRELAND 1797; BARONET 1621.


[Illustration] Peter de Trehouse, who assumed the local name of
Hotham, and was living in the year 1188, is the ancestor of this
family, who were of Scarborough in this county in the reign of
Edward I., a seat which continued the principal residence of the
Hothams for several centuries until it went to decay after the Civil
Wars in the seventeenth century. The siege of Hull in 1643, when Sir
John Hotham was Governor for the Parliament, and with his son was
discovered holding correspondence with the Royalists, for which they
both suffered death, will ever render this family historical.

See Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p. 473; the Scrope and Grosvenor
Roll, vol. ii. p. 306; and Oliver's Beverley, p. 509.

ARMS.--_Barry of ten argent and azure, on a canton or a raven
proper_. M. John de Hotham is stated in the Roll of arms of the
period of Edward III. to have borne, _Or, a bend sable charged with
three mullets argent voided gules_.

Present Representative, Beaumont Hotham, 3rd Baron Hotham.




BOYNTON OF BARMSTON, BARONET 1618.


[Illustration] Bartholomew de Bovington, living at the beginning of
the twelfth century, stands at the head of the pedigree; other
authorities mention Sir Ingram de Boynton of Aclam, (in Cleveland,)
who lived in the reign of Henry III., as the first recorded
ancestor. Barmston came from the daughter and coheir of Sir Martyn
del See, about the end of the fifteenth century.

During the Civil Wars, Sir Matthew Boynton, the head of this family,
was one of the gentlemen chiefly trusted in Yorkshire by the
Parliament.

See Poulson's History of Holderness, vol. i. p. 196; the Scrope and
Grosvenor Roll, vol. ii. p. 309; and Wotton's Baronetage, vol. i. p.
301.

ARMS.--_Or, a fess between three crescents gules_. This coat was
borne by Monsieur Thomas de Boynton in the reign of Richard II.
(Roll.)

Present Representative, Sir Henry Boynton, 10th Baronet.




WATERTON OF WALTON.


[Illustration] Waterton in the county of Lincoln was the original
seat, and from hence the name was derived at an early period. Sir
Robert Waterton, Master of the Horse to Henry IV., and John
Waterton, who served King Henry V. at Agincourt in the same office,
were of this place; the last was succeeded by his brother Sir
Robert, who was of Methley in this county, which he inherited with
his wife Cicely, the daughter and heir of Robert Fleming, of
Woodhall in that parish, and where his tomb is still preserved. This
Sir Robert was Govenor of Pontefract Castle during the time that
Richard II. was confined there. The present family descend from John
Waterton, a younger son of this house, (the male line of the elder
branch being extinct,) who married Catherine de Burgh, heiress of
Walton, in the year 1435, which has since continued the residence of
this ancient knightly lineage.

See Whitaker's Leeds, vol. i. p. 269; and the Scrope and Grosvenor
Roll, vol. ii. p. 190, for a memoir of Hugh Waterton, Esq.; and the
History of the Isle of Axholme by Archdeacon Stonehouse.

ARMS.--_Barry of six ermine and gules, over all three crescents
sable_.

Present Representative, Edmund Waterton, Esq.




FAIRFAX OF STEETON.


[Illustration] "The truly ancient family of Fairfax," as Camden
styles it, is supposed to be of Saxon origin, and to have been
seated at Torcester in Northumberland at the period of the Conquest.
In 1205 (sixth of John,) Richard Fairfax, the first of the family
proved by evidence, was possessed of the lands of Ascham, not far
from the City of York. His grandson William purchased the Manor of
Walton in the West Riding, which continued for near six hundred
years, till the extinction of the elder male line of the family in
the person of Charles Gregory Fairfax, tenth Viscount Fairfax of
Ireland, in 1772, the inheritance of his descendants. From a younger
son of Richard Fairfax, of Walton, Chief Justice of England in the
reign of Henry VI. the present family is descended, as well as
Fairfax of Denton, Baron Fairfax of Cameron in Scotland (1627,) who
represents an elder line,* and who resides in the United States of
America.

Steeton was the gift of the Chief Justice to Sir Guy Fairfax, his
third son, the founder of this branch of the family, and here he
erected a castle in 1477.

See Lodge's Peerage of Ireland, ed. 1754, vol. ii. p. 397.

ARMS.--_Argent, three bars gemelles gules, surmounted by a lion
rampant sable, crowned or_.

Present Representative, Thomas Fairfax, Esq.

  * He is descended from the _eldest_ son of Sir William Fairfax of
    Steeton, who died in 1557.






NORTON OF GRANTLEY, BARON GRANTLEY 1782.


[Illustration] The pedigree begins with Egbert Coigniers, whose son
Roger was living in the ninth year of Edward II., and was father of
another Roger, who marrying the heiress of Norton of Norton, their
son took that name; sixth in descent was Richard Norton, who joined
with the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland in the Rebellion
of the North in 1569, and thereby caused the destruction of almost
every branch of his family. He was attainted in the twelfth of
Elizabeth, and died in exile in Spain. The present family descend
from Sir Fletcher Norton, Speaker of the House of Commons, descended
from Edmund Norton of Clowcroft, third son of old Richard Norton,
which Edmund had taken no part in the Northern Rebellion.

An elder branch, also descended from the third son of Sir Richard,
and believed to be now extinct, was of Sawley near Ripon, from the
period of Charles I.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. vii. p. 546; Whitaker's Richmondshire,
vol. ii. p. 182; and "Memorials of the Rebellion of 1569."

ARMS.--_Azure, a maunch ermine, over all a bend gules_. In the reign
of Edward II., Sir John de Conyers bore, _Azure, a maunch or, and a
hand proper_. Sir Robert de Conyers at the same period reversed the
colours, bearing, _Or, a maunch azure, and a hand proper_. Monsieur
Robert Conyers in the reign of Richard II. bore, _Azure, a maunch or
charged with an annulet sable_. (Rolls of the dates.)

Present Representative, Fletcher Norton, 3rd Baron Grantley.




SAVILE OF METHLEY, EARL OF MEXBOROUGH IN IRELAND 1765; AND BARON
POLLINGTON 1753.


[Illustration] The family of Savile was one of the most illustrious
in the West Riding of the county of York. Some writers have
fancifully ascribed to it an Italian origin, but it probably had its
rise at Silkston, in this county. It certainly flourished in those
parts in the thirteenth century; and in the middle of the fourteenth
century we find (1358) Margaret Savile Prioress of Kirklees.

In the reign of Edward III. the family divided itself into two main
branches, in the person of two brothers, John of Tankersley and
Henry of Bradley. The senior branch acquired its greatest renown in
the person of George first Marquess of Halifax, a title which became
extinct in 1700. The junior branch was of Copley and Methley, and,
having produced one of the most learned men of our country, Sir
Henry Savile, the Provost of Eton, is now represented by the Earl of
Mexborough.

See Dugdale's Baronage, ii. p. 462; Whitaker's Leeds, vol. i. pp.
272, 310; Archdall's ed. of Lodge's Peerage of Ireland, vol. iii. p.
156; Hunter's Antiquarian Notices of Lupset, 1851; and the Savile
Correspondence, edited for the Camden Society by W. D. Cooper,
F.S.A., 1858.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend sable three owls of the field_. This coat
was borne by Monsieur John Sayvill, in the reign of Richard II. His
son John differenced it by a label of three points gules.


Present Representative, John Charles George Savile, 4th Earl of
Mexborough.




GOWER OF STITTENHAM, DUKE OF SUTHERLAND 1833; MARQUESS OF STAFFORD
1786; EARL GOWER 1746; BARON 1703.


[Illustration] Descended from Sir Nicholas Gower, knight of the
shire for this county in the reign of Edward III., and seated at
Stittenham from about the same period. Of this family, it has been
said, was Gower the Poet, but Sir Harris Nicolas in his memoir of
Gower could not trace the connection. Leland remarks, "The House of
Gower the Poet yet remayneth at Switenham (Stittenham) in Yorkshire,
and divers of them syns have beene knightes." In the end of the
seventeenth century the wealth of this family was greatly increased
by marriage with the heiress of Leveson, of Trentham, in
Staffordshire, and also in the year 1785 by the marriage of the
Marquess of Stafford with Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William
eighteenth Earl of Sutherland, mother of the present Duke.

Younger Branches. The Earl of Ellesmere 1846, and Gower of
Bill-Hill, co. Berks, descended from John son of John first Earl
Gower, by his third wife.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. ii. p. 441; Historical and Antiquarian
Mag., 1828, vol. ii. p. 103; and Leland's Itin., vol. vi. fol. 15.

ARMS.--_Barry of eight argent and gules, a cross patonce sable_.

Present Representative, George Granville William Sutherland Leveson
Gower, 3rd Duke of Sutherland, K. G.




DAWNAY OF COWICK AND DANBY, VISCOUNT DOWNE IN IRELAND 1680.


[Illustration] A Norman family by reputation, and said to be traced
to the Conquest, descended from Sir William Downay, who was in the
wars in the Holy Land with Richard I. in 1192, at which time that
King gave him, in memory of his acts of valour, a ring from his
finger, which is still in possession of the family.

At an early period the Dawnays were in possession of lands in
Cornwall; fifteen manors in that county descended by an heiress to
the house of Courtenay Earl of Devon, about the reign of Edward II.
In Richard the Second's time the family removed into this county by
a match with the heiress of Newton of Snaith. Cowick was the seat
and residence of Sir Guy Dawnay, in the reigns of Henry VII. and
Henry VIII.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. viii. p. 453; and Gilbert's Cornwall,
vol. i. p. 457.

ARMS.--_Argent, on a bend cotised sable three annulets of the
field_.

Present Representative, Hugh Richard Dawnay, 8th Viscount
Downe.




PILKINGTON OF NETHER-BRADLEY AND CHEVET-HALL, BARONET OF NOVA-SCOTIA
1635.


[Illustration] "A right ancient family, gentlemen of repute in the
county (of Lancaster) before the Conquest," according to Fuller in
his "Worthies," and also mentioned by Gwillim as a "knightly family
of great antiquity, taking name from Pilkington in Lancashire." That
estate appears to have remained in the family until the ruin of the
elder branch in consequence of Sir Thomas Pilkington having taken
part against Henry VII. and with Richard III. at the battle of
Bosworth. The present house descended from Sir John Pilkington,
second son of Robert Pilkington, and brother of the unfortunate Sir
Thomas. His son Robert is stated to have been of Bradley, in this
county. He died in 1429, and was the ancestor of Sir Arthur the
first Baronet.

Younger Branches. Pilkington of Park-Lane Hall, in this county,
descended from the second son of Robert Pilkington, of Bradley, who
was living in 1540; and Pilkington of Tore, in the county of
Westmeath, descended from Sir Robert, younger brother of Sir John
Pilkington, ancestor of the house of Bradley.

See Wotton's Baronetage, vol. iv. p. 338; Hunter's South Yorkshire,
vol. ii. p. 394; Burke's Landed Gentry; and "The Grand Juries of the
County of Westmeath," vol. ii. p. 254.

ARMS.--_A cross patonce voided gules_. The crest, "a mower of
parti-colours argent and gules," is said by Fuller in his "Worthies
of England" to have been assumed in memory of the ancestor of the
family having so disguised himself in order to escape after _the
Battle of Hastings. The Battle of Bosworth_ is the more
probable scene of this event, where four knights of the family were
in arms on the part of Richard III.

Present Representative, Sir Lionel Milborne Swinnerton Pilkington,
11th Baronet.




STOURTON OF ALLERTON, BARON STOURTON 1447.


[Illustration] A well-known Wiltshire family, seated at Stourton, in
that county, soon after the Norman Conquest. "The name of the
Stourtons be very aunciente yn those parties," writes Leland in his
Itinerary. "The Ryver of Stoure risith ther of six fountaines or
springer, wherof three be on the northe side of the Parke harde
withyn the pale: the other three be north also, but without the
Parke; the Lord Stourton gyveth these six Fountaynes yn his armes."

The Yorkshire property, and consequent settlement in this county,
came from the match with the heiress of Langdale Lord Langdale in
1775.

Younger Branch. Stourton, (called Vavasour,) of Hazlewood. Baronet
1828, first cousin of the present peer.

See Brydges's Collins, vol. vi. p. 633; and Leland's Itin., vii.
fol. 78 b.

ARMS.--_Sable, a bend or between six fountains proper_.

Present Representative, Charles Stourton, 18th Baron Stourton.




MARKHAM OF BECCA-HALL.


[Illustration] A remote branch of an ancient Nottinghamshire family,
which can be traced to the time of Henry II. The name is derived
from Markham, near Tuxford, in that county, but Coatham was
afterwards the family seat, until it was sold by Markham, "a fatal
unthrift," who was the brother of the antiquary Francis Markham;
this was about the end of the reign of Elizabeth. William Markham,
Archbishop of York, who died in 1807, was the ancestor and restorer
of this worthy family; he was descended from Daniel, a younger son
of the House of Coatham. Becca-Hall has been in possession of the
Markhams since the end of the last century.

See Markham's History of the Markhams, privately printed, 8vo. 1854;
the Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries, 1859; and the
Topographer, vol. ii. p. 296, for Markham of Sedgebrook, co.
Lincoln, extinct 1779.

ARMS.--_Azure, on a chief or a demi-lion rampant issuing gules_. The
Markhams of Sedgebrook bore their arms differenced by a border
argent.

Present Representative, William Thomas Markham, Esq.




BURTON (CALLED DENISON), OF GRIMSTONE, BARON LONDESBOROUGH 1850.


[Illustration] The name is derived from Boreton, in the parish of
Condover, in Shropshire, an estate which remained in the family
until the reign of James I., although the Burtons became resident at
Longner, in the same county, prior to the reign of Edward IV.
"Goiffrid de Bortona," (Burton,) one of the foresters of Shropshire,
in the reign of Henry I., is the first recorded ancestor. The senior
line of this house terminated with Thomas Burton, who died unmarried
in 1730, and whose sister carried the Longner estate to the Lingen
family, who have assumed the name of Burton (see p. 198.) Thomas,
fifth son of Thomas Burton, of Longner, is the ancestor of the
present family, and of the Marquess of Conyngham (elder brother of
the late Lord Londesborough). He went to Ireland in the reign of
James I., and died there in 1665. His great-grandson married the
heiress of Conyngham. The late Lord assumed the name of Denison on
succeeding to the estates of his uncle W. J. Denison, Esq.

See Archdall's edition of Lodge's Peerage of Ireland, vol. vii. p.
173; and Morris MSS.

ARMS.--_Per pale azure and purpure, a cross engrailed or between
four roses argent_, granted in 1478, and commemorative of the
devotion of this house to the White Rose of York.

Present Representative, William Henry Forester Denison, 2nd Baron
Londesborough.




+Gentle.+


RAWDON OF RAWDON-HALL, MARQUESS OF HASTINGS 1816 EARL OF MOIRA IN
IRELAND 1761; BARONET 1665.


[Illustration] Rawdon, in the parish of Guiseley in this county, is
the original seat of this ancient family, which is traced to Thor de
Rawdon, whose son Serlo lived in the reign of Stephen. Rawdon
remained the family residence till early in the seventeenth century,
when Sir George Rawdon, the then head of the house, removed into the
North of Ireland, and was seated at Moira, in the county of Down,
where the family principally lived till the match with the heiress
of Hastings in 1752.

See Whitaker's Leeds, vol. i. p. 171; Brydges's Collins, vol. iv. p.
606; Wotton's Baronetage, vol. iii. p. 467; and Archdall's Lodge,
vol. iii. p. 95.

ARMS.--_Argent, a fess between three pheons sable_.

Present Representative, Henry Weysford Charles Plantagenet Rawdon
Hastings, 4th Marquess of Hastings.




TANCRED OF BOROUGH-BRIDGE, BARONET 1662.


[Illustration] At a very early date, and probably not long after the
Conquest, the ancestors of this family were seated at
Borough-Bridge, which appears to have been ever since one of the
residences of the house of Tancred.

See Wotton's Baronetage, vol. iii. p. 387.

ARMS.--_Argent, a chevron between three escallops gules_.

Present Representative, Sir Thomas Tancred, 7th Baronet.




MEYNELL OF NORTH KILVINGTON.


[Illustration] Hilton in Cleveland appears to have been the original
seat of this ancient family; here it was resident in the twelfth
century, and here it remained till the middle of the sixteenth, when
Anthony Meynell, the immediate ancestor of the present family,
removed by purchase to North Kilvington, which has since continued
the residence of his descendants.

See Graves's History of Cleveland; and Burke's Landed Gentry.

ARMS.--_Azure, three bars gemelles and a chief or_. This is the
ancient coat of Meysnill or Meynell of Dalby-on-the-Woulds in
Leicestershire, and was borne by Trevor de Menyll in the reign of
Henry III., and also by Sir Nicholas de Meynell in that of Edward
II., with the exception of two instead of three bars gemelles.
(Rolls of the dates.)

Present Representative, Thomas Meynell, Esq.




ANNE OF BURGH-WALLIS.


[Illustration] Of this family Mr. Hunter has remarked, that "it is a
single instance of the male line being maintained in its ancient
port and rank out of all the gentry of the Deanery of Doncaster,
summoned to appear before the Heralds in 1584." The pedigree begins
with Sir William de Anne, Constable of the Castle of Tickhill in the
time of Edward II. He married the coheiress of Haringel, from whom
came the manor of Frickley, sold in the latter part of the
eighteenth century. Burgh-Wallis came from the heiress of Fenton in
the reign of Elizabeth. Mr. Hunter observes, "The Annes, like too
many other families, have not been careful of preserving their
ancient evidences, and theirs was not one of the muniment rooms to
which our diligent antiquary Dodsworth had access."

See Hunter's South Yorkshire, vol. ii. pp. 148, 485.

ARMS.--_Gules, three stag's heads cabossed argent attired or_.

Present Representative, George Anne, Esq.




LISTER OF GISBURN, BARON RIBBLESDALE 1797.


[Illustration] The pedigree is traced to the sixth of Edward II.,
when John de Lister was resident at Derby. He married the daughter
and heiress of John de Bolton, Bowbearer of Bollond, and thus became
connected with this county. The elder line was of Mydhope, or
Middop, and afterwards, in the reign of Philip and Mary, of Thornton
in Craven, and became extinct in 1667. The present family is sprung
from Thomas, second son of Christopher Lister, who lived in the time
of Edward IV. The Listers were of Gisburn early in the sixteenth
century, the ancient seat of Arnoldsbiggin in that manor being their
seat for many generations. Lyster, of Rowton, in Shropshire, is
supposed to be a branch of this family, though there is no evidence
of the fact; Rowton has been in possession of the Lysters since
1482.

See Whitaker's Craven, ed. 1812, pp. 38, 103; and Brydges's Collins,
vol. viii. p. 584; and for Rowton, Blakeway's Sheriffs of Salop, p.
144.

ARMS.--_Ermine, on a fess sable three mullets or_. Lyster of Rowton
bears the mullets _argent_.

Present Representative, Thomas Lister, 3rd Baron Ribblesdale.




LASCELLES OF HAREWOOD; EARL OF HAREWOOD 1812 BARON 1796.


[Illustration] A family of ancient standing in this county,
descended from John de Lascelles, of Hinderskelfe, now called Castle
Howard, in the wapentake of Bulmer, in the North riding, living in
the ninth year of Edward II. For seven generations immediately
following they were called "_Lascelles alias Jackson_." About the
reign of Henry VI. they removed to Gawthorpe, also in the North
riding, and afterwards to Stank and Northallerton; Harewood was
purchased about 1721.

See Whitaker's Leeds, vol. i. p. 169; and Brydges's Collins, vol.
viii. p. 508.

ARMS.--_Sable, a cross flory within a border or_. This coat, without
the border, was borne by Monsieur Lascelles de Worthorpe, as appears
by the Roll of the reign of Edward III. Monsieur Rafe de Lascelles
bore at the same period, Argent, three chaplets of roses _vermaux,_
with a border engrailed sable.

Present Representative, Henry Thynne Lascelles, fourth Earl of
Harewood.




WOMBWELL OF WOMBWELL, BARONET 1778.


[Illustration] There was a family who took the local name of
Wombwell from that manor in the thirteenth century, but this cannot
with certainty be connected with it. The pedigree therefore
commences with Hugh Wombwell of Wombwell, son of Henry Lowell de
Wombwell, living in the reign of Edward III. The elder branch of
this family became extinct in the male line on the death of William
Wombwell of Wombwell, Esq. in 1733. Part of the estate from whence
the name is derived belongs to the present family, who represent a
junior line, descended from George Wombwell, of Leeds, who died in
1682, by purchase of the coheirs.

See Hunter's South Yorkshire, vol. ii. p. 124.

ARMS.--_Gules, a bend between six unicorn's heads cooped argent_;
and so borne in the sixth of Henry IV.

Present Representative, Sir George Orby Wombwell, 4th Baronet.




PALMES OF NABURN.


[Illustration] There appears no reason to doubt the antiquity of
this family, said to be descended from Manfred Palmes, living in the
reign of Stephen, and seated at Naburn since the year 1226, by a
match with the heiress of Watterville.

See Burke's Landed Gentry.

ARMS.--_Gules, three fleurs-de-lis argent, a chief vaire_.

Present Representative, the Rev, William Lindsay Palmes.




ROUNDELL OF SCREVEN.


[Illustration] On the authority of Whitaker we learn that Screven
has been in this family since the early part of the fifteenth
century; the first recorded ancestor being John Roundell, of
Screven, living in the third of Henry VI.

See Whitaker's Craven, ed. 1812, p. 76.

ARMS.--_Or, a fess gules between three olive-branches vert_.

Present Representative, the Rev. Danson Richardson Roundell.




"There is no subject more difficult to be dwelt on than that of
honourable descent; none on which the world are greater sceptics,
none more offensive to them; and yet there is no quality to which
every one in his heart pays so great a respect."--SIR EGERTON
BRYDGES'S Autobiography, p. 153.




INDEX

  Abney of Measham, 55
  Acland of Acland, 66
  Acton of Aldenham, 204
  Acton of Wolverton, 291
  Aldersey of Aldersey, 23
  Alington of Swinhope, 138
  Anderson of Brocklesby, 143
  Anne of Burghwallis, 319
  Annesley of Bletchingdon, 185
  Antrobus of Antrobus, 27
  Arden of Longcroft, 233
  Arundell of Wardour, 284
  Ashburnham of Ashburnham, 253
  Ashurst of Waterstock, 184
  Assheton of Downham, 120
  Astley of Melton-Constable, 149

  Babington of Rothley Temple, 131
  Bacon of Raveningham, 155
  Bagot of Bagot's Bromley, 228
  Baldwin of Kinlet, 207
  Bamfylde of Poltimore, 67
  Barnardiston of the Ryes, 241
  Barnston of Churton, 26
  Barttelot of Stopham, 260
  Basset of Tehidy, 31
  Bastard of Kitley, 65
  Baskervyle of Old Withington, 23
  Beaumont of Cole-Orton, 129
  Bedingfeld of Oxburgh, 150
  Bellew of Court, 70
  Bendyshe of Barrington, 12
  Berington of Winsley, 97
  Berkeley of Berkeley Castle, 89
  Berney of Kirby, 148
  Bertie of Uffington, 144
  Betton of Totterton, 213
  Biddulph of Birdingbury, 271
  Bingham of Bingham's-Melcombe, 74
  Blois of Cockfield Hall, 247
  Blount of Sodington, 183
  Bodenham of Rotherwas, 94
  Bond of Grange, 78
  Borough of Chetwynd, 218
  Boscawen of Boscawen-Rose, 35
  Boughton of Rouse-Lench, 298
  Boynton of Barmston, 306
  Bracebridge of Atherstone, 264
  Bray of Shere, 248
  Brisco of Crofton, 43
  Brooke of Norton, 24
  Brooke of Ufford, 243
  Broughton of Broughton, 231
  Brudenell of Dene, 159
  Buller of Downes, 72
  Bunbury of Stanney, 18
  Burdet of Foremark, 51
  Burton of Grimston, 316

  Carew of Haccombe, 61
  Cary of Torr-Abbey, 60
  Cave of Stretton, 52
  Cavendish of Hardwick, 49
  Chadwick of Healy, 125
  Chetwode of Chetwode, 6
  Chetwynd of Grendon, 266
  Chichester of Youlston, 58
  Cholmondeley of Cholmondeley, 16
  Clarke of Ardington, 5
  Clavering of Callaly, 167
  Clifford of Ugbrooke, 63
  Clifton of Clifton, 114
  Clifton of Clifton, 175
  Clinton of Clumber, 179
  Clive of Styche, 214
  Clutton of Chorlton, 25
  Codrington of Wroughton, 288
  Colvile of Lullington, 53
  Coke of Trusley, 54
  Coker of Bicester, 188
  Compton of Compton-Wyniate, 265.
  Congreve of Congreve, 237
  Cope of Bramshill, 226
  Corbet of Moreton-Corbet, 192
  Cornewall of Delbury, 197
  Cotes of Cotes, 236
  Cotton of Combermere, 28
  Courtenay of Powderham, 56
  Courthope of Wyleigh, 261
  Croke of Studley, 183
  Curzon of Kedleston, 47

  Davenport of Woodford, 13
  Dawnay of Cowick, 312
  Dayrell of Lillingstone-Dayrell, 7
  Dering of Surenden-Dering, 101
  De-Grey of Merton, 154
  Digby of Tilton, 76
  Disney of the Hyde, 86
  Dod of Cloverley, 208
  Drewe of Grange, 71
  Dykes of Dovenby, 43
  Dymoke of Scrivelsby, 135

  Eccleston of Scarisbrick, 123
  Edgcumbe of Edgcumbe, 57
  Edwardes of Harnage-Grange, 212
  Egerton of Oulton, 15
  Estcourt of Estcourt, 92
  Eyre of Rampton, 180
  Eyston of East Hendred, 4
  Eyton of Eyton, 203

  Fairfax of Steeton, 308
  Fane of Apthorp, 165
  Farnham of Quorndon, 128
  Feilding of Newnham-Paddox, 267
  Ferrers of Baddesley-Clinton, 269
  Filmer of East Sutton, 108
  Finch of Eastwell, 109
  Fitzherbert of Norbury, 46
  Fitzwilliam of Wentworth-House, 299
  Fleming of Rydal, 281
  Floyer of West Stafford, 80
  Forester of Willey, 211
  Fortescue of Castle-Hill, 59
  Frampton of Moreton, 77
  Fulford of Fulford, 56
  Fursdon of Fursdon, 68

  Gage of Firle, 259
  Gatacre of Gatacre, 202
  Gent of Moyns, 87
  Gerard of Bryn, 118
  Gifford of Chillington, 229
  Glanville of Catchfrench, 39
  Goring of Highden, 254
  Gower of Stittenham, 311
  Gregory of Styvechall, 277
  Grenville of Wotton, 8
  Gresley of Drakelow, 45
  Greville of Warwick Castle, 277
  Grey of Groby, 130
  Grey of Howick, 171
  Grimston of Grimston-Garth, 301
  Grosvenor of Eaton, 14
  Gurney of Keswick, 153

  Haggerston of Ellingham, 173
  Hamerton of Hellifield-Peel, 304
  Harcourt of Ankerwycke, 9
  Harington of Dartington, 64
  Harley of Down-Rossel, 199
  Harpur of Calke, 50
  Harries of Cruckton, 217
  Hazlerigg of Noseley, 132
  Heigham of Hunston, 246
  Heneage of Hainton, 136
  Hervey of Ickworth, 244
  Hesketh of Rufford, 116
  Hill of Hawkstone, 210
  Hoghton of Hoghton-Tower, 113
  Honywood of Evington, 103
  Hotham of South Dalton, 305
  Howard of East Winch, 151
  Huddleston of Hutton-John, 41
  Hulton of Hulton, 122
  Huyshe of Sand, 73

  Irton of Irton, 42
  Isham of Lamport, 164

  Jenney of Bredfield, 242
  Jerningham of Cossey 156
  Jocelyn of Hyde Hall, 98

  Kelly of Kelly, 62
  Kendall of Pelyn, 37
  Kingscote of Kingscote, 90
  Knatchbull of Mersham Hatch, 107
  Knightley of Fawsley, 160
  Kynaston of Hardwicke, 196

  Lambton of Lambton, 83
  Lane of King's Bromley, 240
  Langton of Langton, 140
  Lascelles of Harewood, 321
  Lawley of Spoonhill, 215
  Lawton of Lawton, 27
  Leche of Carden, 25
  Lechmere of Hanley, 296
  Legh of East Hall, 21
  Leigh of West Hall, 22
  Leigh of Adlestrop, 92
  Leighton of Loton, 194
  Leycester of Toft, 19
  Lingen of Longnor, 198
  Lister of Gisburn, 320
  Loraine of Kirk-Harle, 172
  Lovett of Liscombe, 10
  Lowther of Lowther, 279
  Lumley of Lumley Castle, 81
  Luttley of Brockhampton, 96
  Lyttelton of Frankley, 292

  Malet of Wilbury, 287
  Mainwaring of Whitmore, 232
  Manners of Belvoir Castle, 137
  Markham of Becca, 315
  Massie of Coddington, 19
  Massingberd of Wrangle, 140
  Maunsell of Thorpe-Malsor, 163
  Meynell of Hore-Cross, 234
  Meynell of North Kilvington, 318
  Middleton of Belsey Castle, 170
  Mitford of Mitford, 168
  Molesworth of Pencarrow, 33
  Molyneux of Sefton, 112
  Monson of Burton, 142
  Mordaunt of Walton, 270
  Musgrave of Edenhall, 40

  Neville of Birling, 102
  Noel of Bell Hall, 295
  Northcote of Pynes, 67
  Norton of Grantley, 309

  Oakeley of Oakeley, 209
  Oglander of Nunwell, 224
  Okeover of Okeover, 227
  Onslow of West Clandon, 251
  Ormerod of Tyldesley, 124
  Oxenden of Dene, 109

  Palmer of Carlton, 165
  Palmes of Naburn, 323
  Parker of Shirburne Castle, 189
  Patten of Bank Hall, 126
  Pelham of Laughton, 255
  Pennington of Pennington, 111
  Perceval of Nork House, 249
  Pigott of Edgmond, 215
  Pilkington of Nether Bradley, 313
  Plowden of Plowden, 204
  Pole of Radborne, 49
  Pole of Shute, 62
  Polhill of Howbury, 3
  Polwhele of Polwhele, 34
  Poulett of Hinton, 219
  Prideaux of Place, 30

  Radclyffe of Foxdenton, 121
  Rashleigh of Menabilly, 38
  Rawdon of Rawdon, 317
  Ridley of Blagden, 174
  Rokeby of Arthingworth, 162
  Roper of Linstead, 106
  Roundell of Screven, 323
  Rous of Dennington, 245
  Russell of Kingston Russell, 75

  St. John of Melchborne, 1
  Salvin of Croxdale, 82
  Salway of Moor Park, 217
  Sandford of Sandford, 195
  Savile of Methley, 310
  Scrope of Danby, 300
  Scudamore of Kentchurch, 95
  Sebright of Besford, 297
  Selby of Biddleston, 171
  Seymour of Maiden-Bradley, 283
  Sheldon of Brailes, 276
  Shelley of Maresfield, 256
  Sherard of Glatton, 100
  Shirley of Eatington, 262
  Shuckburgh of Shuckburgh, 273
  Skipwith of Harborough, 272
  Sneyd of Keel, 238
  Speke of Jordans, 220
  Spencer of Althorpe, 161
  Stanhope of Shelford, 177
  Stanley of Knowesley, 119
  Starkie of Huntroyd, 124
  Staunton of Longbridge, 268
  Stonor of Stonor, 181
  Stourton of Allerton, 314
  Strickland of Sizergh, 280
  Strode of Newenham, 69
  Sutton of Norwood, 176
  Swinburne of Capheaton, 169

  Talbot of Grafton, 293
  Tancred of Borough Bridge, 318
  Tatton of Tatton, 17
  Tempest of Broughton, 303
  Thornes of Llwyntidman, 216
  Thornhill of Stanton, 54
  Thorold of Marston, 139
  Throckmorton of Coughton 274
  Thynne of Longleate, 289
  Tichborne of Tichborne, 223
  Toke of Godington, 105
  Townley of Townley, 117
  Townshend of Rainham, 157
  Trafford of Trafford, 115
  Trefusis of Trefusis, 34
  Tregonwell of Anderson, 78
  Trelawny of Trelawny, 29
  Tremayne of Helligan, 36
  Trevelyan of Nettlecombe, 221
  Trye of Leckhampton, 91
  Turvile of Husband's Bosworth, 127
  Twysden of Royden Hall, 104
  Tyrell of Boreham, 84
  Tyrwhitt of Stanley Hall, 201

  Upton of Ashton Court, 222

  Vernon of Sudbury, 48
  Villiers of Middleton-Stoney, 186
  Vincent of Debden-Hall, 88
  Vyvyan of Trelowarren, 32

  Wake of Courtenhall, 158
  Walcot of Bitterley, 206
  Waldegrave of Naverstoke, 85
  Wallop of Wallop, 225
  Walpole of Wolterton, 147
  Walrond of Dulford, 69
  Waterton of Walton, 307
  Welby of Denton, 134
  Weld of Lulworth, 79
  West of Buckhurst, 257
  Weston of West Horsley, 250
  Whichcote of Aswarby, 142
  Whitgreve of Moseley, 239
  Whitmore of Apley, 205
  Wilbraham of Delamere, 20
  Willoughby of Wollaton, 178
  Wingfield of Tickencote, 190
  Winnington of Stanford, 294
  Wodehouse of Kimberley, 146
  Wollaston of Shenton, 133
  Wolryche of Croxley, 99
  Wolseley of Wolseley, 235
  Wombwell of Wombwell, 322
  Wrey of Trebigh, 38
  Wrottesley of Wrottesley, 230
  Wybergh of Clifton, 282
  Wykeham of Tythrop, 182
  Wyndham of Dinton, 286
  Wyvill of Constable-Burton, 302



  WESTMINSTER:
  J. B. NICHOLS AND SONS, PRINTERS.
  PARLIAMENT STREET.




  [Transcriber's Notes:

    The following misprints have been corrected:

    [in this county of B ckingham] ->
      [in this county of Buckingham]

    [directly to the Couquest] ->
      [directly to the Conquest]

    [This family wrs originally] ->
      [This family was originally]

    [Torr-Abbey was purchasd] ->
      [Torr-Abbey was purchased]

    [EARL WALDEGRVE 1729] ->
      [EARL WALDEGRAVE 1729]

    [Cornewwall of Delbury.] ->
      [Cornewall of Delbury.]

    See under "COMPTON OF COMPTON WYNIATE":
    [the seventeenth eentury.] ->
      [the seventeenth century.]

    [extinct in the last centnry.] ->
      [extinct in the last century.]

    [who assumed the loca name] ->
      [who assumed the local name]

    [G. H. M'Gill's account], this may seem a misprint but
      [M'Gill] is an existing name.

    As the text below "DIGBY OF MILTON" suggests, the placename
    [Milton] should be [Tilton]. Confirmation for this has been
    found in "the Leicestershire Historian", vol. 2, no. 8 (the
    article "The Tilton Family in America and its Link with Tilton
    on the Hill" written by Peter D. A. Blakesley), page 7:
    "... the family of Digby, lords of the manor of Tilton from the
    twelfth century until the seventeenth century, when the manor
    was sold."
    [DIGBY OF MILTON, BARON] ->
      [DIGBY OF TILTON, BARON]

    Another misprint for [Tilton] has been found in the "Index":
    [Digby of Minton, 76] ->
      [Digby of Tilton, 76]

    [Bedingfeld of Oxburgh, 156] ->
      [Bedingfeld of Oxburgh, 150]

    [Leigh of East Hall, 21] ->
      [Legh of East Hall, 21]

    [Onslow of West Clandon, 52] ->
      [Onslow of West Clandon, 251]

    Two misprints in this one:
    [Wake of Courtenhall, 138] ->
      [Wake of Courteenhall, 158]

    The author used asterixes to indicate notes.
    Unfortunately 3 asterixes lack an explanation.
    They are located at:
      [Leicestershire, iv. pt. 2. p. 519.*]
      [Leicestershire, iii. pt. 2, p. 1009*]
      [ii. pt. i. p. *261;]

    The word [coheiress] also occurs with the notation [co-heiress].
    Both notations have been maintained.

    The plain text file of this ebook uses underscores to indicate
    italic text and plus signs to indicate a bold Gothic typeface.

    Each family description starts with an illustration representing
    their arms. In the plain text file these have been replaced with
    [Illustration].

    A few cases of punctuation errors were corrected, but are
    not mentioned here.
  ]







*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NOBLE AND GENTLE MEN OF ENGLAND ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


