The Project Gutenberg eBook of Longshanks
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Longshanks

Author: Stephen W. Meader

Illustrator: Edward Shenton

Release date: March 4, 2025 [eBook #75520]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, Inc, 1928

Credits: Susan E., David E. Brown, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital Library.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONGSHANKS ***





LONGSHANKS

[Illustration: HE LIFTED HIM CLEAR OF THE GROUND]




  Longshanks

  _by_
  STEPHEN W. MEADER

  ILLUSTRATED BY
  EDWARD SHENTON

  HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY, NEW YORK




  COPYRIGHT, 1928, BY
  HARCOURT, BRACE AND COMPANY, INC.

  PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA




ILLUSTRATIONS


  HE LIFTED HIM CLEAR OF THE GROUND              _Frontispiece_

  HE PULLED A PISTOL OUT OF THE BOX                          58

  HE COULD SEE THE BEAST ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE POOL      154

  HE SAW THE PRINT OF A NAKED FOOT                          178




CHAPTER I


Down the last long hill into Wheeling Town came the stage, its four
lean horses at a canter and its brakes squealing under the heavy foot
of Long Bill Mifflin.

The early April sun, which had been promising Spring all day, was gone
now, and a chill rose with the dusk from the river. The boy on the seat
beside the driver pulled his cloak around him.

“Le’s see, now,” said Long Bill, unwinding the lash of his sixteen-foot
whip. “Ye say ye hain’t got no friends in the town, here, but I reckon
ye got plenty o’ money. So it ’pears like a public house is the thing.
Which one? Well, thar’s three or four good taverns. The one we put
up at is the Gin’ral Jackson. Then thar’s the Injun Queen, an’ Burke
Howard’s place, only I wouldn’t counsel ye to go thar. Good licker,
good beds, an’ bad company. Most all of ’em will be full now, though,
with the steamboat leavin’ tomorrow.”

Tad Hopkins thanked the driver for this information and looked down
from his perch with interest as the big coach lurched through the ruts
of Wheeling’s main thoroughfare. Soon they came to a stop in the yard
of the General Jackson Inn. Tad climbed down, pulled his portmanteau
out of the great leather “boot” at the back of the coach, said good-by
to his comrade of the past two days, and went into the tavern.

“No beds--not even half a bed,” said the inn-keeper with a gesture of
finality.

Tad went down the street, jostling his way through crowds of river-men,
backwoodsmen, drovers, and traders. Occasionally he passed an elegantly
dressed dandy, but for the most part the people he saw were rough and
uncouth.

Wheeling, he now realized, was a frontier town of the great West, and
he felt a tingle of excitement at the thought that he had come to the
gate-way of his adventure.

Finding a place to sleep in this alluring outpost seemed a difficult
matter, however. The landlord at the Indian Queen was as short in his
refusal of lodgings as the first man had been, and at two other taverns
where he inquired Tad was met with the same answer. Then, down close to
the river front, he saw a big white-painted frame building with a crude
sign that bore the letters “HOTELL.” Lights blazed in the downstairs
windows, and a sound of music came from within.

Tad trudged up the steps and entered a large room with a sanded floor.
Two fiddlers were scraping away diligently at the farther end of the
place, and a crowd of thirty or forty men stood drinking and watching a
raggedly dressed old fellow do a buck-and-wing dance.

At one end of the long and busy bar lounged a big, red-haired man in
shirt-sleeves. Tad crossed to him.

“Could you put me up for tonight?” he asked.

The man eyed him shrewdly.

“I’ve got a cot in one of the rooms, but it’ll cost ye dear,” he
answered at length. “Two dollars for the night. An’ I doubt ye’ve that
much money.”

“Yes,” said Tad. “It’s high, but I can pay it.”

“Let’s see your cash,” the other replied coldly.

Tad hesitated a second, then pulled a purse from under his belt. The
big handful of Government notes and silver which he held up seemed to
satisfy the tavern-keeper.

“Two dollars--in advance,” he said, with a nod. “That’ll cover supper
an’ breakfast.”

Tad paid him and was stuffing the purse back into its place when he
saw a tall, dark man, who had come up during the conversation and was
standing a few feet away, leaning an elbow on the bar. He was a rather
handsome fellow of twenty-four or twenty-five, with a sweeping, dark
mustache and restless, sharp, black eyes. His clothes, beautifully
tailored and expensive, seemed to have been worn a little too long or
too carelessly. But it was his hands that Tad noticed first of all.
They were white and slim, with extraordinarily long fingers. And on the
middle finger of the right hand was a queer-shaped silver ring with a
dull green stone.

The man shifted his gaze quickly, as Tad looked up, and the next moment
he was ordering a drink from one of the bartenders.

“Here, you, Rufus,” cried the landlord to a negro boy who emerged just
then from the kitchen, “take this feller up to Number Four--lively.”

“Yassah, Marse’ Burke,” was the reply, and Tad, hearing the name,
remembered the stage-driver’s warning.

“Burke Howard,” he thought. “Yes, that was the name. But I’ve got to
sleep somewhere, and at any rate I’ll keep my eyes open.”

The darky led him upstairs to a large, bare room with two beds and a
small cot. One of the beds was already occupied by a snoring guest, and
the other had a shabby pair of boots beside it. Tad left his satchel
under the cot and returned to the lower floor. In the great kitchen
just back of the bar he found a long table at one end of which a few
river-men were noisily finishing their supper. And sitting down at
the other end, he was soon served with hot beef stew and potatoes.
The long, cold ride had made him hungry. He did full justice to the
meal and arose feeling better. The fiddlers were still playing when he
returned to the main room. He watched awhile, then took his cloak and
went out of the stuffy atmosphere of the bar into the cool night. A few
steps down the hill brought him to the river front, and just below was
the big gray shape of a steamboat, tied up at the landing. There were
a few lights aboard her, and an occasional rumble of barrels came from
the lower deck where sleepy stevedores were loading the last of her
cargo for the long voyage down river.

Tad saw a small, lighted office at the landward end of the dock and
picked his way through and around the scattered piles of freight till
he reached it.

“I want to take passage to New Orleans,” he said to the sour-visaged
clerk.

The man continued to write an entry in his book, scowling importantly.
Then he cast a slow, scornful glance in the boy’s direction.

“To New Orleans,” he replied, “the fare is forty-five dollars--
_forty-five--dollars_--with yer stateroom an’ meals, that is. I reckon
you mean Cincinnati or maybe Louisville, don’t you?”

“No, New Orleans,” Tad repeated patiently and drew forth his wallet.
“Here’s fifty. The name is Thaddeus Hopkins of New York.”

Subdued, the clerk gave him his change and his receipt, and Tad climbed
the hill once more to Burke Howard’s place with a great sense of being
a man of the world.

It was not until a half hour later, when he lay in his cot in the big,
dark bedroom at the Inn, that his lonesomeness returned.

The man in the farther bed snored steadily with a purring sound, and
Tad could not go to sleep, try as he would. Instead he lay there
thinking of the events of the last few days and of the journey ahead of
him.

It was amazing to realize that less than a week had passed since he
received his father’s letter. Back at the Academy for Young Gentlemen
in southern Pennsylvania, where he had spent the last two winters,
it had seemed, five days ago, as if the long routine of lessons would
never end. And then, one morning, had come the long envelope from New
Orleans, addressed in his father’s big, bold hand, and in it had been
news!

It was in the breast pocket of his coat now, but he did not need to
look at it, for he knew it by heart.

  “Dearest Tad,” his father had written:

  “I hear from Master Lang that you have been doing well in your work.
  Otherwise I would hesitate to suggest the plan I have in mind. As it
  is, I believe there can be no harm to your education in leaving the
  school before the end of the term.

  “I shall be sailing for England in a short time, to look after some
  business, and it has occurred to me that it would make a pleasant
  vacation for us both if you were to accompany me. There is now a
  steam-packet leaving Wheeling every fortnight for the South, and I
  wish you to make ready as soon as possible, so as to sail by the next
  vessel, on the sixth of April.

  “A draft on my bankers is enclosed, which Master Lang will cash for
  you, and this should provide ample funds for the journey to New
  Orleans.

  “I am looking forward with great joy to our voyage together,
  and shall be waiting for you at the levee on the arrival of your
  steamboat.

                                               “Lovingly, your father,
                                                      “JEREMIAH HOPKINS.
  “March 12, 1828.”

Tad’s preparations for departure, watched enviously by the other boys
in his form, had filled the next two days. And at daybreak of the third
morning he had boarded the Baltimore-to-Wheeling stage.

Crossing the mountains on the great creaking coach, listening to Long
Bill Mifflin’s stories and watching the road ahead for signs of the
deer and bear and mountain lions that the driver assured him filled the
woods--all this had made it a journey he would never forget. And now he
was in Wheeling with the mighty river running past, not a hundred yards
from his bed, and the steam-packet _Ohio Belle_ waiting to carry him on
the long southward slant of nineteen hundred miles to New Orleans.

Tad was genuinely fond of his father, though they had seen little of
each other for the past two years. Jeremiah Hopkins was a New York
cotton broker of considerable wealth. His interests frequently took
him into the South and to Europe, and after Tad’s mother died, he had
left the boy in the care of school-masters.

The prospect of a whole long Spring and Summer spent in voyaging with
his father made Ted’s heart thump joyfully. He was just drowsing off,
with rosy thoughts of the future filling his head, when the door of the
room was opened quietly.

A tall figure entered and crossed the room with slow steps, lurching
a little as he walked. There was no lamp in the place, but a ray of
moonlight, reflected from the wall, lighted the man’s face dimly. As
Tad watched, he moved a few paces toward the cot and stood motionless,
looking down at the boy with a somber expression as if he were deep
in thought. Tad looked up from under lowered lids, pretending to be
asleep, and after a moment the figure turned away and went over to the
vacant bed. It was the gentleman with the long white fingers he had
seen below in the bar.

For some reason he could not quite define, Tad was frightened. Surely
there was nothing strange about the man’s actions. A little drunk
perhaps, but incidents like that were to be expected in a river-front
tavern. He watched him partially undress and tumble into the bed, where
presently his snores began to mingle with those of the first sleeper.
And not till then did Tad draw a full breath.

Stealthily he felt beneath his pillow for the purse. It was there, safe
and sound. He wound the leather thong tightly about his fingers and lay
quiet, too much disturbed to sleep.

An hour crept by. Somewhere off in the woods back of the town a fox
barked, and hound dogs answered with a frenzy of baying. A tipsy
roisterer went past, mouthing a river song. Then gradually the noises
of the night subsided, and Tad dropped off to sleep.




CHAPTER II


Bright April sunshine, streaming in the window of the room, flooded the
bare walls with matter-of-fact daylight. It shone in Tad’s eyes, and he
woke up with a start.

The steamboat! It left at eight. He reached for his big silver watch
under the pillow, and found to his relief that it was only a few
minutes after six. At the same time he discovered the purse, still
firmly attached to his hand. The terror of the night seemed ludicrous
now. He chuckled at his own timidity and began dressing rapidly.

The two other occupants of the chamber were still heavily asleep
when Tad doused his face and hands in the wash basin, strapped his
traveling-bag, and went out.

In the front bar there was only a single customer--a humorous-faced
little Irishman in brass-buttoned blue clothes, who sat beside a table
with a glass of hot toddy in one hand and a pipe in the other.

He looked at Tad jovially. “Bedad, an’ it’s glad I am the last barrel
is aboard!” he said, quite as if they had known each other for years.

“Are you one of the steamboat men?” the boy asked.

“I am that, lad--first mate of the _Ohio Belle_, an’ a terrible tired
one. We’ve been takin’ cargo for two days an’ nights on end. An’ now
I’ve got a half hour ashore while they’re a-gettin’ up steam.”

“Does she sail in half an hour?” asked Tad.

“Or sooner,” replied the Irish mate. “Th’ ould man’s a driver whin his
cargo’s once loaded. If it’s breakfast ye’re thinkin’ of, wait and
have it aboard with me. I take it ye’re bound down river. I’ve bread
and butter and a cold chicken in me locker, and we’ll get coffee from
that black son o’ Ham in the galley. The passengers ain’t supposed to
begin gettin’ their meals aboard till dinner time. But we’ll have a
breakfast, or my name’s not Dennis McCann.”

The plan sounded like a good one to Tad. He waited while the mate
finished his glass and paid his score; then, shouldering the bulky
portmanteau, he followed him down the hill.

“Ye see,” said McCann, “this steamboatin’ is only a bit of a change
like, for me. Me real business is deep-water sailin’, as ye may tell by
the roll o’ me legs.”

Already, by twos and threes and singly, people were going aboard.
Tad and his companion shouldered through the crowd that had assembled
to witness the great event of the week, and crossed the gayly painted
gangplank.

Instead of climbing the broad stairway to the deck above, McCann led
the boy forward through a narrow alleyway just inside the paddle-box
amidships. A blast of heat struck them as they emerged, and Tad found
himself facing a row of glowing doors, where sweating darkies fed the
boiler-fires with cordwood.

“That’s prime, seasoned hickory,” shouted the mate above the roar of
the fires. “Don’t take long to get a head o’ steam with wood like this.
But wait till ye see the dirty green stuff they give us down along the
lower river.”

They went through another passage where the heat was almost stifling
and came out on the forward cargo deck, solidly piled with merchandise.
Climbing a steep, ladder-like companionway, they reached the main
passenger deck. Higher still, Tad could see the “Texas,” or upper deck,
with the pilot-house perched atop, and just aft of it the two tall
stacks, with clouds of smoke pouring from them.

“Rest here awhile, me lad,” said McCann, “whiles I rustle that
breakfast.”

Tad sat down on his portmanteau, close to the rail, and watched the
spectacle below. The passengers made a colorful assemblage. There were
plain pioneer folk in linsey-woolsey and butternut cloth, going back to
their homesteads in Indiana or Illinois. There were wealthy planters
from the cotton States, resplendent in fine raiment and attended by
retinues of colored body-servants. Small tradesmen, drovers and the
like, from the nearer river towns, made up a fair proportion, and Tad
saw two or three lonely-looking hunters in buckskin, with their long
rifles and little packs of provisions, bound for the wild western
country. One oddly dressed man, with an eyeglass, who was constantly
asking questions and jotting down notes in a little book, Tad decided
must be an English tourist.

There remained a little group which he found it harder to identify.
Three or four men in fashionable frock-coats, their pearl-gray beaver
hats cocked at a rakish angle, and clouds of smoke rolling up from
their cigars, idled and jested by the landward end of the gangplank.
Either they had no luggage, or it was already stowed aboard. Tad did
not care for their looks, and he liked them still less when he saw
them joined by a companion--the tall, dark fellow whom he had already
encountered twice in his brief stay at Wheeling.

The friendly mate returned just then with a steaming pail of coffee and
led Tad off to his bunk in the officers’ cabin. Breakfast over, McCann
rose and put on his mate’s cap.

“There goes the ‘all ashore’ call,” said he. “I’ll take ye down to the
purser, an’ ye can get yer room from him.”

Tad found the stateroom assigned to him and put his bag inside. It was
a tiny cubicle with a single bunk, its window opening on the deck far
aft. Outside, the boy joined a group of passengers at the rail.

The last hurried arrivals had rushed aboard, and final preparations for
departure were now in progress. Negro deck hands stood by the mooring
ropes at bow and stern. At a signal from the pilot-house the cables
were cast off and the darkies burst into song as they hauled them in
and coiled them down.

Bells rang sharply in the engine-room. With a creak and a splash the
tall paddle-wheels began to turn, and the steamboat, catching the swift
current, swept grandly out into the Ohio. A long, bellowing blast of
the whistle bade farewell to the waving throngs astern.

That day and those that followed were full of experiences for Tad.
Hour after hour he sat by the rail, or stood on the Texas with his
friend the mate, watching the valley unfold. The river was running
bank-full, fed by the April freshets; and added to the eight or ten
miles an hour of which the steamer was capable, the strong current gave
them a speed that seemed almost dizzying.

They shot past dozens of loaded broadhorns and keel-boats, drifting
down with a single long steering-oar directing their course. The
boatmen would cheer the _Ohio Belle_ or curse her, depending on their
humor and whether or not their craft misbehaved when her wash hit them.

Some of these rude arks held all the worldly possessions of a
family--homesteaders setting out to conquer the wilderness in Missouri
or Iowa. Many of them had chicken coops on their half-decks, and once
Tad saw a yoke of red steers chained to a post amidships and watching
the water with rolling, frightened eyes.

He tried to imagine what sort of life the people led, aboard those
homely, slow-moving boats. Almost he envied the freckled youngster
he saw fishing over the side of one weather-beaten broadhorn. If he
weren’t going to New Orleans to see his Dad--well, he couldn’t help
thinking what a lazy, carefree, interesting voyage one could take in
an Ohio River flatboat!

To Tad, raised in the more thickly populated country along the Atlantic
seaboard, the forest-covered hills that rolled back from the river as
far as the eye could see were satisfyingly wild and mysterious. And yet
he was surprised at the feeling of bustle and activity that pervaded
the valley.

Little settlements of new log houses were continually appearing along
the shore, and in many places sheep and cattle were grazing in freshly
cleared pastures. Ferry-boats, rowed by lusty river-men, plied back
and forth between the West Virginia and Ohio villages. Trading scows,
loaded with calico, tools, and manufactured goods from the East, put in
at the farms and hamlets to exchange their merchandise for produce.

“This is a great country, lad--a great country,” Dennis McCann would
say. “Some day, belikes, ’twill be almost as great as Ireland!”

Tad watched the pilot spin the huge wheel to left and right, as
the _Ohio Belle_ splashed her way down through the shallows. There
was plenty of water and fairly easy steering, but the skill of the
gray-bearded old keel-boat man in the pilot-house seemed uncanny
nevertheless. He could sense a sunken snag farther away than Tad could
see a floating one. And he seemed to mind steering at night no more
than in the daytime.

They stopped at Marietta and later at Parkersburg that first afternoon,
and as darkness fell, the chief pilot came up to relieve his assistant,
who had had the wheel most of the day. Tad, before he turned in that
night, had the thrill of standing in the pilot-house and watching the
old-time river-man take his craft down through the inky blackness,
swinging the bends like a race horse.

The little stateroom was clean and comfortable in spite of its tiny
size, and the boy slept so soundly that not even the hoarse wail of the
whistle awoke him.

The _Ohio Belle_ made a stop of several hours at Cincinnati to load and
unload freight the morning of the third day. And again the following
forenoon at Louisville there was a long delay.

The weather, which had been fine up till then, turned cloudy with spits
of rain that morning, but Tad, as usual, spent his time on deck with
the mate. The river was high enough to make the passage of the Falls a
possibility, and the _Ohio Belle_, shallow of draft like all the river
steamers, took the white water safely.

The rain increased in the afternoon, and Tad was finally driven inside
out of the wet. He had paid very little attention to his fellow
passengers on the voyage so far. But now, for something to do, he
strolled down the inside passageway to the main saloon. It was just
before he reached the cabin companion that he passed a door standing
ajar and heard men talking angrily. Suddenly one voice rose to a
shout and a chair was pushed back with a violent scraping noise. Then
the door opened, and in it, with his back to Tad, stood a tall man
in shabby, well-cut clothes. The fellow swayed a little and caught
the door-jamb with one hand. With the other he flung a pack of dirty
playing-cards back into the room. Then he spoke in a thick, choking
voice.

“You’ve cleaned me,” he said. “You’ve got my last cent, curse you! But
I’ll be back, and don’t you forget it!” As he turned to leave he almost
fell over Tad, and the boy was startled by the look of ferocity on his
white, drawn face--a face he knew and had begun to fear.

With long strides the man reached the end of the passage, then checked
himself in the act of turning the corner, and glanced back at Tad as if
he remembered something. An instant later he was gone.

The other gamblers in the stateroom were silent for a moment after his
departure. Then one of them burst into a loud guffaw.

“So he’ll be back, eh!” he cried. “That’s a good ’un. Who’d lend him a
plugged nickel on board here?”

They resumed their game, and some one slammed the door shut. Restless,
Tad roamed about the interior of the vessel, went down to watch the
darkies firing the boilers on the lower deck, watched the Indiana
bluffs to the northward slide past in the rain, ate supper with the
other cabin passengers, and finally went back to his stateroom. When he
had undressed he bolted the door, opened the window a few inches for
fresh air, and went to bed. Lulled by the steady beat of the rain, he
was soon asleep.

It must have been hours later when he woke, for the downpour had ceased
and a gusty wind was blowing. Was it the wind rattling his door that
had wakened him? Rubbing his eyes he rose on one elbow and peered over
the edge of his bunk. And there, just climbing through the window, was
the black, looming figure of a man.




CHAPTER III


For three or four seconds Tad was too terrified to move. Then he
recovered his presence of mind and scrambled up, drawing a deep breath
to shout for help. But before he could utter a sound the intruder had
dropped, cat-like, to the floor of the stateroom and was on him in a
bound.

A powerful hand closed on his windpipe, and a gag of some sort was
stuffed into his mouth.

Tad, strong and wiry for his fifteen years, fought back at his tall
antagonist savagely, but it was an unequal struggle. With a swift skill
that argued previous experience, the prowler pulled a cord from under
his coat, and twisting the lad over on his stomach, he caught his
wrists in a tight hitch behind him. Half a dozen quick passes of the
cord, and Tad lay trussed up on the bunk, helpless as a baby.

Then the man rose leisurely, produced a tinder-box from somewhere, and
lit a candle, which he stuck on the lid of the box and set down on the
floor. Tad, getting a good look at him for the first time, saw that
he was masked. A black handkerchief with holes cut in it covered the
whole upper part of his face.

With quick fingers the fellow went through Tad’s clothes, taking his
father’s letter, his watch, and a few other trifles, and putting them
in his own pocket.

The boy, struggling desperately to get his hands free, had to lie there
in anguish and see his treasures taken. At last, as the robber paused,
baffled for a moment, Tad felt the knots that held him slip a little.
He bent his knees up to loosen the tension between ankles and wrists,
and worked his arms cautiously back and forth. One hand slid through,
then the other, but he lay still and gave no sign.

The man had opened the portmanteau and was rummaging through it
swiftly, but still he did not find what he was after. As he rose, the
candle’s beam shone full on his right hand and Tad had a momentary
glimpse of a ring--silver, with a dull green stone. It was the gambler
from Wheeling, who had seen him open his purse to pay for his lodging.
Would he give up the search and leave as he had come? It was a foolish
hope. At that very instant the fellow turned and stepped over to the
bunk, his slim, sure fingers feeling under the pillow where the purse
was hidden.

Tad could restrain himself no longer. With a cry, muffled by the gag,
he pulled his arms from behind him and leaped upon the thief. Together
they went sprawling across the tiny cabin. The candle was kicked over
and extinguished and the struggle went on in the dark. Suddenly the
gambler shifted his position, and Tad felt an arm tighten about his
head with a grip like a vise. His ears began to sing, and all his
senses were numbed by the pain of the head-lock. He was powerless to
move. Then he became dimly aware that his antagonist was using his
other hand to open the door. A draft of cold air struck him and he was
pulled out upon the deck. With a suddenness that gave him no time for
terror, he felt himself swung up and outward over the rail. And then,
as in a bad dream, he was falling--falling.

The shock of the icy water brought him out of his stupor. For a second
or two his whole energy was concentrated on getting back to the air
again, for the fifteen-foot drop had plunged him deep. As he came up,
choking, he pulled the gag out of his mouth and tried once more to call
for help. But the stern of the _Ohio Belle_ had already gone past, and
there was nothing around him but watery blackness.

What should he do now? He was a good swimmer, but the water was almost
as cold as in winter, and he knew he could not last long in it. The
steamer had been running close to the Indiana shore most of the day,
and he had been thrown from the starboard side of the vessel. Something
told him to try for the north bank. With the river sweeping down upon
him at five or six miles an hour, it was easy to keep his sense of
direction. He struck out almost at right angles to the current and swam
steadily, saving his strength.

The task seemed endless. As far as he could tell, he might still be
miles from land, and he was numb with cold. Twice he had such an attack
of shivering that he could not take a stroke for several seconds. His
short cotton night-shirt was not much of an impediment to swimming, but
the trailing cord was still tied fast to one of his feet, and he used
up some of his strength in a vain effort to get rid of it.

Some last reserve of pluck kept his arms and legs going despite the
achy weariness that was in them. He thought he saw a blacker mass
rising in the blackness ahead, but it seemed to draw no nearer, and he
lost hope. Then his toe struck something soft that frightened him. He
lashed out desperately to get away from it and struck it again. It was
mud. He could stand up, half out of water, and wade. The looming bulk
ahead of him must be trees. In another minute or two he was crawling up
the bank, so nearly exhausted that he seemed hardly able to move, yet
filled with an indescribable sense of happiness at being alive.

Another attack of shivers made him realize that he must try to get
warm. Rising, he half stumbled, half ran along a sort of path that
followed the top of the bank. And a moment later, to his joy, he saw
a small cabin set in a clearing ahead of him. Hurrying forward, he
approached the front of the shack and was about to rouse its inmates
by knocking on the door, when two huge dogs came running around the
corner and rushed at him. They growled and snapped so viciously at his
bare legs that Tad made a hasty retreat, beating them off with the cord
which he had removed from his ankle and was still carrying.

“Hello, the house!” he cried.

But the people inside either could not or would not hear him, and after
a moment of hesitation a renewed attack by the dogs caused him to keep
on his way westward along the bank. The damp twigs and briars slapped
and scratched his naked legs, but he was past paying any attention to
such trifles. If only he could find a sheltered corner of some sort
where he could curl up and rest without perishing of cold!

The path opened after a while on another clearing, bigger than the
first, and he made out the shapes of half a dozen scattered houses off
to the right, away from the river. There was something depressing in
their silent blackness, and after his experience at the last place, he
had little heart to approach them. Instead he followed a deeply rutted
road that led forward to the bank of what seemed to be a good-sized
creek flowing into the Ohio.

Tad groped his way to the door of a log shanty which stood by the
water--a store-house of some kind, he thought. But here again he was
disappointed, for a heavy padlock secured the latch.

As he stood there, shivering and desperate, his eye fell on a long,
dark bulk beside the landing-stage. It was a boat--a clumsy broadhorn
of the kind he had seen drifting down the river.

He drew closer and saw a roofed shelter covering the after part. It
looked warm and dry. Surely there could be no harm in resting there
until daylight. He would come ashore before the owners appeared, he
told himself. And a moment later he was scrambling aboard. There
were rough, warm burlap bags and a heavy tarpaulin in the shelter.
Shivering, he made a place for himself in a deep, snug corner and
pulled the canvas cover about him. After a moment or two his body began
to warm the nest, and a heavenly peace seemed to soothe his weariness
like a drug. Before another minute passed, he had fallen into a slumber
far too deep for dreams.




CHAPTER IV

  “Hard upon the beach oar--
     She moves too slow.
   All the way to Shawneetown,
     Lo-o-ng time ago-o.”


The song came sifting into Tad’s consciousness pleasantly, to the
accompaniment of a snapping, sizzling noise and a most appetizing
smell. He opened his eyes and tried to think where he was, but
everything was dark around him--dark and strange. He put out a hand
and felt bags close by. Then he remembered in a flash all the details
of the catastrophe that had brought him there. With a start he sat
upright, looking out over the tops of bales and boxes.

It was not only morning but bright, broad daylight. And the boat
was moving. He could see the line of trees on shore marching past.
Painfully, for he was very stiff and sore, he changed his position so
that he could look out ahead. There in the waist of the broadhorn, just
forward of the shelter, was a small fire blazing cheerfully on a rough
clay hearth. Over it crouched a young man in a cap and “store clothes,”
holding a frying-pan full of bacon, which gave forth the pleasant
aroma he had already noticed.

The tuneful cook resumed his song, adding a verse that took his crew
on the next stage of their journey, and Tad, looking beyond him,
discovered that there was still another person aboard the flatboat.
Up on the half-deck, forward, a big, loose-jointed young fellow of
nineteen moved back and forth. In each brown fist he gripped the handle
of a fifteen-foot sweep-oar trimmed out of an ash sapling, and pulled
steadily and powerfully, walking two steps forward and two back at
each stroke. He was dressed in a coarse butternut shirt and fringed
leather hunting-breeches, which made a quaint contrast to the more
pretentious costume of the man by the fire. He was a tremendously
tall youngster--as tall as any one Tad had ever seen--and his gaunt,
big-featured, homely face, with the quirk of humor at the corners
of his mouth, attracted the boy instantly. He had a mop of tousled,
rusty-black hair and deep-set gray eyes that were fixed, at that
moment, on the Kentucky shore.

The singer’s voice ceased abruptly, and Tad, glancing in his direction,
found the man’s eyes looking straight into his own.

“Well, I’ll be tee-totally--” he began, and rose, almost dropping the
pan. “Looky here, Abe! Leave go them oars an’ come a-runnin’.”

The young giant in the bows landed amidships in a single long jump.

“What is it? Snakes?” he cried.

For answer the other pointed a finger at Tad, as the boy crawled out of
his hiding-place. The look of open-mouthed astonishment on the cook’s
face had changed now to one of outraged wrath.

“See here, you--you dirty, thievin’ skunk!” he blustered. “What in the
nation do ye think ye’re a-doin’ aboard of our--”

His voice was drowned by a roar of good-natured merriment from his
tall companion. And Tad, looking down at himself for the first
time, realized what a grotesque appearance he presented. The brief
night-shirt he had worn when the gambler entered his stateroom had
been torn to ribbons in the fight which followed. And after being
covered with mud and further ripped by the briars, it was no longer
recognizable as a garment. From head to foot he was smeared with dirt
and dried blood, and his hair was matted with twigs.

“All right,” he grinned, “I don’t blame you for laughing, or for
thinking I’m a thief, either. But you don’t have to worry. I just
crawled in here to sleep last night, and--”

“What do ye mean by makin’ free with other folks’ property?” began the
smaller of the two boatmen. The one called Abe put a restraining hand
on his shoulder.

“Shut up, Allen,” he said. “Let the boy tell his story. You’re cold,
ain’t you, son? Here, wrap yerself up in this.”

Gratefully, Tad pulled around him the heavy blanket which was offered,
and proceeded to give them an outline of his adventure, while Allen
continued cooking the breakfast.

“Humph!” grunted that individual, still sourly, when Tad had finished.
“How much was you robbed of?”

“Not quite two hundred dollars,” answered the boy.

“Ha, ha!” chuckled the doubter. “That’s a likely yarn!”

“Wait a minute, Allen,” Abe interrupted. “I don’t know how much money
he had an’ don’t keer. But I do know when a boy’s tellin’ the truth.
What’s your name, sonny?”

“Thaddeus Hopkins,” answered the boy. “People generally call me Tad.”

“All right, Tad,” the tall young backwoodsman continued. “I reckon the
fust thing you’re interested in is breakfast. After that we’ll see
about dressin’ you and make some plans.

“Now, Allen, if the viands are prepared you may serve our frugal
repast.”

There was such a comical dignity in his stiff bow as he made the
last remark that both his hearers laughed in spite of themselves.
Without more ado they attacked the smoking pile of bacon and cornmeal
johnny-cake, and Tad thought no food he had ever eaten had tasted
quite so good. There had seemed to be a prodigious lot of it when they
started, but the giant sweep-oarsman had an appetite quite in keeping
with his huge, gaunt frame, and in fifteen minutes the pans were empty.

“Thar,” said Abe as he wiped the last of the bacon grease from his tin
plate with a piece of corn-bread, “now maybe we can give some attention
to navigatin’ the good ship _Katy Roby_.”

He winked at Tad as he pronounced the name, and Tad, glancing at Allen,
saw him flush with embarrassment and turn quickly to the business of
cleaning the breakfast utensils.

Abe looked at both banks, to make sure the broadhorn was drifting
on the right course, and rummaged in a pine box under the shelter,
astern. From it he pulled forth presently a pair of woolen breeches,
worn and shrunken, and a clean white cotton shirt.

“These may fit ye a bit long,” he said to Tad, “but rollin’ up the legs
an’ sleeves won’t hurt a thing. Maybe ye’ll grow into ’em.”

Tad was really touched, for he could see that the gangling young
boatman had given him his own “best clothes.”

“Thanks,” he said. “That’s mighty good of you. And if you don’t mind,
I’m going to wash before I put them on.”

There was a length of new rope for mooring, tied to one of the
bow-posts, and when Tad had stripped off his rags he threw the rope
over the side and let himself down into the river. In the bright
morning sun it felt warmer than the night before, but there was no
temptation to stay in long. He scrubbed off as much of the grime as he
was able, holding on by one hand, and then clambered back aboard. Five
minutes later he was warm, dry, and decently clad, at least according
to the simple standards of the river.

“Now, Allen,” said Abe, resting on his oar-handles, “what are we
a-goin’ to do with this young rooster?”

Allen was frowning in perplexity.

“Got any folks along this part o’ the river?”

“No,” Tad said. “I don’t know a soul between here and New Orleans. But
if you want to put me ashore, I suppose I could get something to do and
earn my keep until Father comes for me.”

Abe shook his head. “That don’t seem to me exactly reasonable,” he
said. “We’re a-goin’ down to New Orleans ourselves, an’ we could maybe
use a spare hand. What d’ye say, Cap’n?”

Allen seemed a trifle dubious. “Think the rations’ll hold out?” he
asked.

“Sartin they will,” Abe replied. “We can make it quicker’n we planned,
by runnin’ nights sometimes. An’ with a real dead-shot rifleman like
you along, we ought to jest about live on b’ar an’ turkey meat, anyhow.”

The other member of the crew was somewhat mollified by these words.
“Wal, maybe so,” said he. “I reckon we can’t help ourselves. What can
ye do, boy? Cook?”

“I’m sorry,” Tad hesitated, “I--I don’t think I can, but perhaps I
could learn.”

“I b’lieve Allen, here, would condescend to give ye a lesson,” put in
Abe, seriously.

“Hm,” said Allen. “Can ye ketch fish, or chop wood?”

“I never tried,” answered Tad, “but I’d like to.”

Abe, who had been rowing hard during this questioning, leaned on his
oars again.

“Now see here,” he said, “you don’t have to worry about this yere boy.
Any youngster with the spunk to wrestle with a robber, an’ be dropped
off a steamboat into cold water at midnight, an’ swim across the Ohio
River, an’ run three miles, naked, with mean dogs after him--can look
out for himself. He’ll be cookin, fishin’, _an’_ choppin’ wood long
’fore he gits to New Orleans.”

With these words Tad was officially admitted to membership in the
crew of the home-made flatboat _Katy Roby_ and set forth on one of
the strangest and most interesting adventures that ever befell a
fifteen-year-old school boy.

All that fine April day they made steady progress down the swollen
river. Part of the time Abe and Allen worked at the oars, adding a
mile or two an hour to the speed of the current. Part of the time they
loafed in the sun on the half-deck, asking Tad questions about the
politer world of the Eastern cities and swapping yarns about their own
great frontier country.

“You mean to tell me they _all_ wear shoes in New York?” asked Abe
incredulously.

“Yes,” said Tad, “all but a few poor children. I’ve never gone barefoot
since I was a baby.”

“Gosh!” the lanky backwoodsman exclaimed. “Look at _my_ feet!” He
pulled off his moccasin and showed a sole covered by a single vast
callus. “Outside of about five months in winter when I wore hide boots,
I never had a shoe on my foot till last year. Pap always figgered it
was cheaper to let me grow my own leather,” he added, with the twinkle
in his gray eyes that Tad was learning to expect.

Piecing together what the two boatmen told him and what he picked up
from their conversation, he learned that Allen Gentry was the son of a
merchant living in the settlement at the mouth of Little Pigeon Creek,
where Tad had first sought shelter in the flatboat. His father, James
Gentry, was the owner of the craft, and was sending Allen to sell the
corn, pork, and potatoes which made up its cargo in the great produce
market of New Orleans.

Abe, as he himself told Tad, was merely a “hired hand,” sent along
to do the heavy work and to “take keer” of Allen. But it was quite
apparent that the long-limbed country boy with his quaint humor and his
common sense was the real leader of the expedition.




CHAPTER V


When the lingering spring sunset came, the flatboat was bowling along
so merrily that Abe decided to make a long day’s run of it. He left
the bow sweeps and stretched his long bulk on the little after deck
with the steering-oar under his arm. Allen pulled out a home-made banjo
from some mysterious hiding-place and proceeded to strum it softly. His
pleasant tenor voice, floating out across the reaches of the river, was
joined by a bass bellow from another broadhorn astern, and for several
miles they drifted to the mellow harmony of “Skip to My Lou,” “Weevily
Wheat,” “Down the Big River,” and “Wabash Gals.”

The afterglow dimmed out of the sky, and bright stars filled it. And
Tad, yawning drowsily, was sent to bed. Rolled up in a blanket on the
hard deck planks and lulled by the murmur of the river, he slept as
soundly as he ever had in his life.

The sun had already risen when he woke, and he was surprised to see
the budding branches of a big sycamore overhanging the deck of the
flatboat. Abe was up on the bank chopping wood for the breakfast
fire, and Allen was casting off the stern mooring-rope which had been
fastened around the tree. Tad threw off his blanket, pulled up a
bucket of water from over the side, and hastily performed his morning
ablutions.

By the time he had finished, the boat was well on its way again.

“Wal, youngster,” chuckled Allen, “how’s this? You awake an’ ready to
eat again?”

The truth was, Tad did have a fine appetite for breakfast, and he
admitted it with a grin. “I feel as if I ought to work for it first,
though,” he said.

“So you can,” Abe put in. “Here’s the ax. S’pose you split some o’ this
wood up in nice fine kindlin’, while I go up forrard an’ persuade her a
little with the oars.”

Tad, willing enough, picked up the ax and started clumsily to hack away
at the chunk of pine. By dint of hard work he managed to split away a
cross-grained sliver from one side and was attacking the larger piece
again when a smothered choking sound reached his ears. There lay Allen,
rolling on the planks and holding his sides with laughter.

In a country where children learned to use an ax almost as soon as they
could walk and supplied the house with firewood before they knew their
A-B-C’s, the sight of Tad’s awkwardness was enough to provoke any man’s
mirth.

But Abe did not laugh. He left his oars and came down to Tad’s side.

“Watch,” he said. “You’ll git the knack of it in no time.” And swinging
the ax one-handed, with no apparent effort, he cleft the log cleanly
through the center, then into quarters. His arm rose and fell steadily,
and in an amazingly short time there was only a neat pile of slender
pine splints lying by the hearth.

As they breakfasted, a big keel-boat, piled with farm implements and
furniture and with half a dozen lively-looking children swarming over
and through everything, steered close to them.

“Movers,” said Allen.

A bearded man with a cross, discontented face appeared at the gunwale
of the keel-boat and hailed them.

“Where are we? Can you tell me?” he shouted.

“This is the Ohio River,” Abe replied cheerfully.

“Yes, but whereabouts--what part?” fretted the mover.

“Jest now,” said Abe, considering, “you’re in Indianny. But in five
more minutes your bow-end’ll be in Illinois. Thar’s the Wabash, now.”

He pointed to the right bank a mile or so below, and Tad saw a wide
river emptying into the Ohio from the north.

The bearded man muttered something that might have been thanks and went
back to the tiller of the keel-boat, while Abe resumed his breakfast.

“They’ll make a mighty valuable addition to the population of whatever
place they’re a-goin’ to,” he remarked between mouthfuls of johnny-cake.

“Must be Illinois,” put in Allen. “That question sounded jes’ like a
‘Sucker.’”

The latter scornful epithet, Tad discovered, was universally applied
by the Hoosiers to their neighbors on the west. Although hundreds of
families were moving from Indiana into Illinois every year and the
people of the two States were often blood kin to each other, there was
a vigorous rivalry that did not always confine itself to calling names.

Something of this feeling Tad was soon to see, for they made a landing
at Shawneetown on the Illinois shore, sometime during the forenoon.
One of the first things he had asked his new friends was how he might
send word of his safety to his father, in New Orleans. And it had
been agreed that they should stop at the first town where steamboats
touched and mail a letter.

There were no writing materials aboard the _Katy Roby_. When Abe and
Allen had calculations to make, they did it with a burnt stick on the
deck planking. So, leaving Allen to guard the flatboat and her cargo,
Abe and Tad climbed the muddy hill from the landing-stage and sought a
place where paper and ink might be bought. One of the first buildings
they reached was a rambling log house with a wide porch in front,
which turned out to be a general store. They entered and made their
purchases, and Tad started to write his letter, using the head of a
barrel for a table. Briefly he described the attempt to put him out
of the way and how he had made his escape. Basing his estimate on the
average speed of the _Katy Roby_, he wrote that with good luck they
would reach New Orleans within two or three weeks.

He was just signing his name to the message when he heard a commotion
of some kind outside. The group of loafers who had been hanging around
the door when they entered now left the porch with a clatter of boots.
A loud voice was raised tauntingly.

“Wal, you long-legged, slab-sided, lousy Hoosier, want to see how it
feels to git thrown?” it asked.

Tad hastily pocketed his letter and went to the door. In the midst of a
ring of spectators outside, a big, stocky, river-man was brushing the
dirt off his hands, while a crestfallen youth in torn homespun lifted
himself out of the mud.

Abe’s long, awkward figure towered above the group of bystanders.
Evidently the champion’s invitation had been addressed to him. He
strolled forward into the ring. “Don’t keer ’f I do,” he said.

There were roars of laughter from the Illinois men.

“Them leather breeches is to scare off the varmints!” one cried.

“What do they feed you on, Longshanks?” asked another.

“Suckers,” answered Abe, with a grin, and pulled his belt a notch
tighter.

The river-man was broad-shouldered and powerful, with short, thick arms
like a bear’s. He pounded himself on the chest with a huge fist and
roared:

“Here I am! I’m ‘Thick Mike’ Milligan o’ Kaskaskia! I kin drink more
likker an’ walk straighter, chaw more terbakker an’ spit less juice,
break more noses an’ swaller less teeth, than any man on the rivers. I
eat wildcat fer breakfast an’ alligator fer supper. I’m a ragin’ hyena!
I’m a terror to snakes! Look out, fer I’m a-comin’!”

As he shouted the last words, he jumped in the air and clapped his
heels together. Then with a rush he charged at Abe.

There was nothing awkward about the tall Hoosier now. He took a quick
sidewise step, springy as a cat on his moccasined feet. One long arm
shot out and caught Milligan by his thick neck, spinning him about so
that he dropped on one hand and one knee. The river-man was up in an
instant, roaring like a bull. But now he came on more warily, trying
to get in close, where he could come to grips with his opponent. Abe,
circling and retreating constantly, held him out of reach with those
long, sinewy scarecrow arms of his.

The onlookers began to hoot and jeer. “They call that wrastlin’ in
Indianny?” yelled one. And another edged close to Abe to trip him.

“Look out!” cried Tad, but his warning was unnecessary. The lanky
young flatboatman had seen the movement out of the corner of his eye,
and instead of falling over the outthrust foot he suddenly leaped
backward, seized the tricky bystander by the collar, and hurled him
through the air, straight at Milligan. Then, without the loss of a
second, he was after the two of them. Catching the river bully off his
balance, he lifted him clear of the ground and slammed him on his back,
piling the dazed and gasping meddler on top of him before either could
collect his wits.

“Thick Mike” picked himself up angrily, while the crowd howled its
desire for the “best two out o’ three falls!”

Abe seemed to have undergone a change. He was mad now--mad clean
through--and his gray eyes blazed as he trod lightly forward to meet
Milligan’s attack.

The river-man tried a new plan. Waiting till Abe was close, he suddenly
plunged in low, hoping to get a crotch-hold and upset the lanky
Hoosier. This time Abe wasted no time in dodging. Before the other’s
hands were fairly on him, he had seized him with both arms around the
middle and whirled him, feet in air, over his shoulder. Milligan landed
heavily on the small of his back, and with a panther-like spring Abe
was on him, pinning his shoulders flat.

There was no longer a question as to which was the better wrestler,
and the stocky Kaskaskia man was the first to admit it. He rose, still
a little dizzy from the force of his fall, and shook Abe’s hand.

“They ain’t many kin do that,” he grinned. “How tall air ye, lad?”

“Six foot four,” said Abe.

“An’ how old?”

“Nineteen,” answered the flatboatman.

“Great sufferin’ catfish!” the other exclaimed. “Ye’d oughter be a
good-sized feller when ye grow up!”

The crowd of loafers did not seem disposed to take their champion’s
defeat quite so good-humoredly. As Abe and Tad went back to the store
to post the letter, these hangers-on followed at their heels.

“Huh! Wrastle? Sure he kin. That ain’t nothin’,” said one of them. “But
what’d he look like in a real ruckus--knock-down an’ drag-out?”

The tall youth turned on the top step and deliberately rolled up the
sleeves of his shirt.

“Listen,” he said, quietly. “One Hoosier to one Sucker ain’t a fair
fight. But if any two of ye want to tackle me at once, I’ll be pleased
to accommodate. Step right up here, boys.”

His words produced an immediate hush. For a moment he stood there
eyeing them scornfully, while they shuffled their feet and looked
sheepish. Then he entered the store.

“Come on, Tad,” he said with a wink, “we’ll be a-goin’ now.”

The boy gave his letter to the postmaster, got that worthy’s assurance
that he would mail it on the steamboat _Nancy Jones_, from Louisville,
likely to stop at Shawneetown in the next day or two, and followed Abe
down the hill.

Allen, who had heard the shouting, was filled with curiosity. “What’d
ye see, boys--a fight?” he asked.

“No,” said Abe, “it was jest a demonstration.” And chuckling, he went
about the business of getting headway on the boat. Allen, however, was
not satisfied till he had got a glowing account of the wrestling bout
from Tad.

“That’s right,” he nodded. “This yere Abe is the powerfullest critter
ever I see. He kin outrun, outwrastle an’ outfight any man in our
country, back home--yes, an’ outtalk any woman. He’s as fast as greased
lightnin’ and tougher’n a white oak post.”

It was early afternoon when they passed the broad mouth of a cave on
the Illinois bank. Allen, who had once been as far as Paducah on the
steamboat, pointed it out and told the gruesome story of the Wilson
Gang, a notorious outlaw band which, twenty-five years earlier, had
made the cavern its stronghold.

“Thar was more’n a hundred of ’em,” said he, “an’ they used to rob
boats an’ travelers all up an’ down the river. They say thar’s a sort
o’ chimney goin’ up from that cave into another one over it, an’ after
the gang was cleaned out, sixty skeletons of murdered folks was found
up in that secret cave.”

Tad gazed at the place in awe as they drifted past. It looked peaceful
enough now. The sun slanted brightly across the gray face of the rock,
and a flight of twittering swallows darted in and out of the dusky
opening.

They fished and talked, sang and whittled, with alternate spells at the
oars, all afternoon, and toward sunset sighted a black cloud of smoke
beyond the next bend.

“Steamboat comin’,” remarked Abe. A long, mournful whistle-blast came
up the river, and they saw a man, at work in a stump-filled clearing,
suddenly drop his plow handles and run down to the shore. He leaped
in the air, waving his hat frantically as the tall stacks and shining
upper works of the craft appeared around the bend. His horses eyed the
approaching monster with alarm, snorted, reared, and would have dashed
off if the plow had not buried itself and anchored them.

The steamer passed within a dozen yards of the flatboat and they read
her name, _Amazon_, in gilded letters across her paddle-boxes. The big
wheels thrashed and churned with a mighty uproar as the vessel forced
her way up against the current at all of four or five miles an hour.
The foamy wake that rolled out from her paddle-wheels caught the _Katy
Roby_ at an awkward angle and made her pitch like a steer. Bracing his
feet, Abe pulled on the oars with all his strength to keep the craft
from swinging sidewise. A roar of laughter went up from the deck of the
_Amazon_ where two or three of the crew were gathered.

“Hold her, bean-pole!” shouted one of them.

Abe dropped the oars, picked up a four-foot stick of firewood, and sent
it whirling after the steamer, already many yards away. He threw so
hard and so true that the billet bounced off the rail a foot from the
fellow’s head, and the steamboat men retreated hastily.

Abe grinned as he handled the sweeps again. “I’m willin’ to take their
wash,” he said, “but not their sass.”

That night, when Allen was tuning up his banjo, Tad went aft to lie by
the steering-oar with Abe. He looked at the long, easy frame of the
backwoods youth and thought of that morning’s wrestling-match.

“Jiminy, but you’re strong!” he said, admiringly.

Abe shifted his position, looking off at the low stars.

“That’s nothin’!” he said gruffly. “I was born big. There’s no credit
in that. What I’d like is to be able to sing an’ play the banjo like
Allen. I can’t carry a tune any more’n a crow. Or I’d like to go to an
academy like you. I bet you’ve read a power o’ books!”

Tad was truthful. “Not such a terrible lot,” he said. “They’ve got a
whole library full at school, but when you have to read them, there’s
no fun in it.”

“Gee,” murmured Abe, and was silent for a little. Then he turned toward
the younger boy, his rugged, homely face serious in the starlight.

“I couldn’t git much schoolin’, back whar we lived on Little Pigeon,”
he said. “But I’ve read some--books like the Life o’ Washington, an’
the Fourth Reader an’ the Bible, an’ _Æsop’s Fables_, an’ the Laws of
Indiana, an’ _Pilgrim’s Progress_, an’ _Robinson Crusoe_, an’ the
Almanac. Guess I’ve read about all the books I could borrow from any
one ’round Gentryville.

“’Course I learned to write an’ cipher in the log school. An’ I used
to work out the accounts for folks--neighbors--an’ write letters for
’em if they had to send news off. I fixed me up a quill pen out of a
turkey-buzzard’s feather, an’ the ink I made out o’ blackberry-briar
roots an’ copperas.

“I’d rather have book-learnin’ than all the muscle in the world. They
say there’s a new University goin’ to open in Indiana next Fall. If
I was rich, maybe I wouldn’t go up thar in a hurry! But I guess I’ll
likely stay workin’ ’round on farms an’ boats.”

“I should think you’d want to,” Tad put in. “If I was as big and husky
as you, and could do the things you can, I’d never go back to school.”

“Thar,” chuckled Abe, “you’ve put your finger on it. I seem to be a
born corn-husker. An’ that’s all right, too. I like an ax. I like to
work with an ax, splittin’ rails, buildin’ things. An’ I like to plow,
an’ hoe, an’ take care o’ cattle. Only,” he paused, frowning, “some
way, that ain’t enough.” And for many minutes thereafter he sat buried
in thought, his chin in his hand. Tad, respecting the stern, almost sad
expression on the older boy’s face, rose quietly and joined Allen up
forward.

Allen finished his song and greeted him. “What’s the matter--Abe
got one of his silent spells?” he asked. “Don’t mind him. He’s all
right--jes’ shiftless an’ dreamy sometimes.”

And striking a chord or two, he launched into the stanzas of “Old Aunt
Phoebe.”




CHAPTER VI


They were peeling potatoes for the noon meal on the fourth day of the
flatboat’s voyage when Tad chanced to look off to the southward and
stood up suddenly, with an exclamation of wonder. Above the Kentucky
bluffs a cloud was rising swiftly--a living cloud of beating wings.

“Pigeons!” said Abe. And Allen, springing to his feet, ran back under
the shelter to get his fowling-piece.

The great flight of birds came swiftly. Before Allen could finish
loading the long-barreled shotgun, the first of them were winging
over--twos and threes and fifties, and then thousands--so many that
they seemed to cover the sky. A vast, vibrating hum of wings filled the
air.

Allen rammed home his charge and lifted the gun. Taking aim was hardly
necessary. He pointed where the flock seemed thickest and fired. At the
loud report a sort of eddying movement went through the nearer part of
the cloud of birds, but there was no change in the speed or direction
of the flight.

Then bodies of dead and wounded pigeons began dropping like feathered
hailstones into the river. They sent up little splashes of water. There
must have been a dozen at least.

Only one pigeon fell aboard the _Katy Roby_. Tad picked up the
warm, plump body and held it, watching the eyes glaze. The sleek
brownish-gray feathers were ruffled, and a shot had carried away part
of the long tail.

Allen was grumbling. “One pigeon! I hit plenty, but they all fell
in the water. We’d oughter have a dog along to fetch ’em.” He was
reloading rapidly while he talked, and raised the gun again, looking
for the likeliest place to shoot.

Abe’s voice came from the bows.

“Don’t kill any more of ’em, Allen,” he said with something like a
command in his tone. “Spose’n you _should_ git one or two more to fall
in the boat. It takes more’n three pigeons to make a meal for this
crew. You ain’t jest shootin’ ’em for the fun of it, are you?”

“Well, why not?” replied young Gentry with a scowl. “Thar’s millions
an’ millions. Look at ’em!” He waved his arm in a wide arc. “They’re so
thick they’re ’most a nuisance.”

“No, sir,” Abe answered. “They never harm crops, do they? An’ they’re
pretty, an’ hev a right to live. They’re bein’ killed off too fast as
it is. My Pap says when he was a boy in Kaintuck’ there used to be
four or five flights every year when the pigeons would make the sun
dark for a whole day. You don’t see that now. This flock here is ’most
over now. That’s what comes o’ killin’ ’em by the bushel jest for the
sport of it.”

Even as he spoke, the rear guard of the flock swept over, leaving the
sky clear once more. The dark cloud of beating wings drew away rapidly
to the north, and in a moment the only traces of the event were the
stiffening body in Tad’s hand and the acrid smell of burnt powder as
Allen sulkily set about cleaning his gun.

When dinner was over, the long-legged backwoods boy rose, stretched and
climbed to the forward deck. Before picking up the oars he shaded his
eyes with his hand and looked away south-westward.

“Boys,” he said, “unless I’m mighty mistook, we’ll pass Cairo an’ be
sailin’ down the Mississippi before night.”

“Huh,” snorted Allen, “what do _you_ know ’bout it? This ain’t the
headwaters o’ Little Pigeon Creek ye’re a-navigatin’!”

“Reckon I’m as wise an ol’ barnacle as any aboard this packet,” Abe
replied with a twinkle. “Whar do _you_ figger us to be, Cap’n Gentry?”

“Wal, le’s see, now,” said Allen. “We sighted Paducah jes’ before noon.
Now I fergit how many miles it is from thar, but seems like they told
me it was a full day’s run, that time I was down thar I told ye about.”

The argument went on spasmodically for the balance of the afternoon.
But Abe, as usual, was right.

An hour after sunset, in the calm blue dusk, they floated out of the
Ohio with the broad current of the Mississippi sweeping down in a
resistless muddy tide from the northwest. They knew the power of that
flood a moment later when another broadhorn, just below them, was
caught in an eddy and whirled end for end like a twig in a brook.

Abe pulled with might and main on the starboard oar, and Allen swung
the steering-sweep to bring them over toward the Kentucky shore. “We
might’s well stay this side whar it ain’t so yaller, long as we kin,”
said the big bow-oarsman. “I feel sort o’ more at home in water that
might ha’ come down from Little Pigeon.”

They tied up to the Kentucky bank while it was still light enough to
find a good mooring-place. Not much singing or hilarity aboard that
night. Something of the vast, brooding mystery of the river had
got into them. Tad didn’t feel afraid, or even lonesome, exactly.
He just wasn’t in a mood for talking. The immense distances, the
wildness of the country, the hurrying, watery sounds of the mile-wide
flood--perhaps it was none of these, or all of them combined, that
weighed down their spirits.

“Spooky, ain’t it?” said Allen, shaking himself uneasily, and he went
to his blankets without taking out the banjo.

Tad followed soon and left Abe sitting hunched in dark silhouette
against the stars, his big hands gripped around his knees and his eyes
on the shadowy line of willows and cottonwoods across the river. He was
used to spells of sadness. This one seemed no worse than usual.

Morning made a difference. The sun shone on budding leaves of tender
green and sparkled on the dimpling surface of the water. A perfect
riot of bird-song filled the air. In the big trees that overhung the
mooring-place there must have been hundreds of warblers, finches and
song-sparrows, and several times Tad caught the red flash of a cardinal
among the branches.

Allen sang and Tad whistled intermittently while they cooked and ate
breakfast, and even Abe hummed something that might have been “Turkey
in the Straw” and danced a home-made double shuffle on the fore deck,
as he cast off.

“Make the most of it, boys,” he laughed. “This is all the Spring we’re
a-goin’ to see. By day after tomorrer we’ll ketch up with Summer, at
this rate.”

The sun was warm enough that day to give truth to the tall boy’s words.
They passed islands where the dogwood, at the height of its bloom, made
a white canopy almost to the water’s edge. And in fields along the
shore there were bare-footed children running about in calico frocks.

The river did not seem lonesome in daylight. Above and below them they
could see busy specks that were keel-boats and barges. They overtook
one of these toward noon--a shabby old trading-scow. On its after part
was built a little house, or “caboose,” from which a length of rusty
stove-pipe projected. And a dingy bit of what had once been bright
cotton print waved in tatters at the top of a pole. Despite the forlorn
appearance of the craft, cheerful sounds came from it, as the Indiana
flatboat drew alongside.

A squat, broad-shouldered old man with a bushy gray beard and merry
eyes was sitting on a box, forward of the caboose, scraping away
lustily at a backwoods fiddle, and thumping time with one foot on
the deck. And sitting facing him, apparently entranced by the hoarse
squeaking of the fiddle, was a fine red setter dog.

The old fellow finished his tune with a flourish and swung about on his
box.

“Howdy, boys!” he cried. “I’m Moses Magoon o’ the Big Sandy, peaceful
trader an’ musician by choice, but a bad ’un when raised. Mebbe you’ve
heard o’ these half-horse, half-alligator fellers. I’m one-third
horse, one-third alligator, an’ the other third mixed catamount an’
copperhead. What d’ye find yerselves in need of today? I’ve got calico,
buttons an’ sewin’ thread, extra fine pantaloons, shoe leather an’
wheaten flour, pots an’ pans, powder an’ lead, candles, salt, nutmegs,
an’ red pepper.”

All this had been said in a loud, hearty voice and without any apparent
pause for breath. Mr. Magoon was about to continue when Abe interrupted
by laying an oar across the bow of the trading-boat and pulling the two
craft together, side by side. This maneuver was not to the liking of
the setter, which jumped up, growling, teeth bared for action.

“Be still, Fanny,” said the old man quietly. With a dexterous motion he
pulled an old-fashioned horse pistol out of the box beneath him and
laid it across his knees. At the sight of this weapon, fully eighteen
inches long, Abe’s jaw dropped comically.

[Illustration: HE PULLED A PISTOL OUT OF THE BOX]

“Hol’ on!” he exclaimed, and hastily withdrew the foot he was about to
set aboard the scow. “’Pears like we’d better introduce _our_selves,
too. We’re the law-abidin’est, softest-spoke flatboat crew betwixt
this an’ the Falls o’ the Ohio. We’re two-thirds fishin’ worm an’
three-quarters turtle-dove. All we want’s a chance to trade some good
salt pork an’ ’taters fer a pair o’ them extra fine pantaloons--boy
size--’bout big enough fer young Tad here. Ef you’ll jes’ put away that
blunderbuss an’ explain the purpose of our visit to Miss Fanny, we’ll
come aboard an’ do business.”

Magoon’s whiskers parted to display a set of strong, even teeth. He
tipped his head back and reared with laughter. “So ye shall,” he
said at last, and wiped the tears from his eyes with the back of a
weather-browned hand. “Durned ef I ever heerd sech a brag as that on
any o’ the rivers,” he chuckled. “But I’ll guar’ntee the fishin’ worms
an’ turtle-doves kin take keer o’ theirselves when they hafter.”

He rose, thrust the pistol back into its hiding-place, and limped over
to the gunwale with outstretched hand. “Make yerselves to home,” he
said.

They lashed the two boats loosely with a length of rope, and Allen
stayed aboard the _Katy Roby_ to steer, while Abe and Tad made their
purchase. They picked out a pair of serviceable brown homespun breeches
from the merchant’s stock, and for them traded two flitches of bacon
and a barrel of apples.

Allen, with an eye to the profit of the voyage, started to raise some
objection, but Abe merely answered, “I’ll pay fer ’em when I git my
wages,” and went on rolling out the barrel.

When the transaction was completed, the genial trader looked up at
the sun and whistled. “What about dinner?” he asked. “I’ve got a big
catfish here--more’n Fanny an’ me could eat in a week. S’pose I make
some hot coals an’ we’ll broil him on a plank.”

The Hoosier crew were in hearty agreement with this idea, and while Abe
relieved him at the steering-oar, Allen set about making corn-bread as
their share of the feast.

Tad, who had no special chores to perform, stayed aboard the scow and
got better acquainted with Magoon and the red setter.

The old river-man had an ingenious sort of Dutch oven built into the
wall of the caboose. Adding dry wood to his fire, he soon had a brisk
blaze roaring up the chimney. Meanwhile he proceeded to clean and split
the catfish, and peg it out on a piece of plank which had evidently
been used before for the purpose.

“That pistol,” said Moses Magoon, “my ol’ Pap toted over the mountings
from North Caroliny in ’seventy-nine. It’s old an’ rusty an’ ain’t been
fired fer fifteen year. ’Tain’t even loaded now, but I keep it handy to
persuade some o’ these thievin’ river toughs with.

“I been cruisin’ up an’ down the Mississip’ an’ the Ohio ever since I
was a young feller, an’ I’ve run afoul of ’em all, one time or another.
Jes’ last week here, a big keel-boat with half a dozen men on deck come
up alongside, somethin’ like you did. It was Little Billy, an’ his
gang, from up the North Fork o’ Muddy Run, an’ I figgered I was in fer
trouble.

“But this yere Little Billy has only got his eye out fer two
things--money an’ whisky--an’ I don’t carry neither one of ’em. I
let him come aboard an’ look, an’ he never laid hand on any o’ my
goods--jes’ as polite as you please. ‘Well,’ says he, ‘long as ye ain’t
got no Kaintucky red-eye, what’ll ye take fer the dog?’

“‘Sorry, Mister,’ I says, an’ I was scairt. ‘She ain’t no ways fer
sale,’ I says. ‘She’d break her heart an’ die if I let her go.’ An’
Little Billy, he jes’ grins an’ says, ‘Right, I had a good dog myself,
once.’ An’ with that he steps back on his keel-boat an’ off they go.

“I had a bad time, couple o’ years back, with Mike Fink--him they
call ‘The Snag,’” the old trader went on. “I landed at New Madrid one
night an’ went up to the store. When I come back, with my arms full o’
provisions, I see another boat tied up, close above. An’ jest as I was
goin’ to step aboard mine, eight or ten men that had been layin’ low
under the bank stood up thar in the dark. One of ’em says, ‘All right,
stranger, we’ll take keer o’ this,’ an’ he grabs the provisions. Then
they march me aboard o’ my own craft an’ tell me to show ’em whar my
money is an’ no monkey business. I acted like I was plumb scairt to
death--teeth a-chatterin’ an’ knees a-shakin’.

“‘All right,’ I finally whispers, ‘I’ll show ye whar it’s hid, only
thar ain’t room fer but two to go in.’

“Mike Fink swings ’round to his gang. ‘Git back on shore, ye lousy
varmints!’ he bellers. When they’re all up on the bank, he pulls out
his knife an’ holds it in his teeth, an’ I lead the way into the
caboose here. It’s a right dark night an’ Mike he strikes a light an’
holds up a candle, while I’m rummagin’ round in the corner. Pretty soon
I undo the ketch o’ this leetle trap door down here in the bulkhead,
an’ open her up. ‘Whar’s that go?’ says the Snag. ‘That’s my secret
hidin-place,’ I says--‘want me to go first, or you?’ An’ I’m still
lettin’ on to be tremblin’ so I kin hardly talk.

“‘You,’ says Mike, ‘an’ by the ol’ ’Tarnation I’ll cut you into stewin’
meat if you try any tricks.’

“So I crawls through the hole on my hands an’ knees, an’ waits fer him
to follow.”

Magoon opened the little trap door as he spoke, and Tad laughed when he
saw a two-foot ledge of deck and then the river beyond it.

“Wal,” the old man went on, “Mike didn’t come through, right off, an’ I
tell you I _was_ scairt. ’Twas so durn dark outside, I knew he couldn’t
see, but he stayed thar an’ tried to figger if I was up to anything.
Finally he says, ‘Bring the money out here in the cabin.’ I’m workin’
at the moorin’-rope all this time, an’ now I make a noise like I’m
tuggin’ an’ liftin’. ‘Can’t,’ says I. ‘It’s too heavy!’

“That fetched him, sure ’nough. Here he comes on all fours, with the
knife still in his teeth. I gives the rope one last pull an’ it comes
away, an’ then ’fore he rightly sees whar he is, I ketches him by the
scruff o’ the neck an’ heaves him overboard.

“You can bet I didn’t wait to see whether he was drowned, neither. I
give a big shove with the oar an’ got out o’ reach o’ the bank, an’
then I stood by the gunwale with an ax, ready to cut the hands off
anybody that tried to swim out an’ climb aboard.

“It must have took Mike a few minutes to crawl out an’ git organized
again. Anyhow they never follered me.”

The last part of the story had been told out on the open deck, and Abe
and Allen were listening with rapt attention.

“Is that the same Mike Fink they call the ‘Snappin’ Turtle’ up our
way?” asked Abe.

“That’s him,” the old man nodded. “He’s called that above the Wabash.
Both names is too good fer him. Wal, boys, how’s the dinner comin’
along?”

Tad’s mind was filled with questions about the river pirates, but he
postponed asking them long enough to do full justice to the planked
catfish. When the meal was over he perched himself on the gunwale of
the trading-boat and waited for the grizzled river-man to get his cob
pipe going.

“Mr. Magoon,” he said, when the blue smoke-clouds were rising at last,
“who do you think is the worst outlaw you ever ran across?”

The old man puffed in silence for a moment. “Reckon the worst I ever
see with my personal eyes was ol’ Jericho Wilson o’ the Cave Gang,” he
replied at length. “Him an’ Black Carnahan an’ Earless Jake Rogers was
a bad bunch. They had more’n a hundred men to back ’em up, an’ kep’
the whole Ohio Valley scairt fer a while. When that posse of up-river
hunters wiped ’em out, I know mighty well we all breathed easier.

“But listen to me, boy. Fer real cold-blooded, cutthroat deviltry,
nobody on any o’ the rivers kin touch this man John Murrell. He an’ his
gang hang out on an island somewhere down beyond Natchez. He started
as a gambler, hoss-thief, an’ murderer, but his main trade nowadays is
stealin’ niggers. They say he’s killed twenty-eight men himself, an’
gosh knows how many the rest o’ the gang have put away. Mostly he works
along the lower river, but once in a while, when things git too hot
around the plantations, he stays out o’ sight fer a while, mebbe up the
Ohio, or over in Alabama.”

“Did you ever see him?” asked Tad.

“Not me, an’ I hope the day don’t soon come!” said Magoon, fervently.
“They tell me he’s a tall, pale-faced sort o’ feller, with dead black
hair like a Frenchman. But the chances are you’ll never run afoul of
him. He don’t bother with flatboats much. He’s out for bigger game.”

He got up from his box and looked over at the eastern shore, shading
his eyes with his hand. Some one on the bank was waving a white cloth
to and fro.

“That’s a signal fer me to land,” he said. “The folks along the river
know a tradin’-scow by the calico flag, an’ wave to us when they want
us.”

Tad got back aboard the _Katy Roby_, and they cast off the tie-rope.

“Wal, so long, Hoosiers,” said Magoon. “Reckon I won’t see ye again,
less’n I ketch ye in New Orleans. Take keer o’ yerselves. Ho, ho!
Fishin’ worms an’ suckin’ doves! Heh, heh!” And he was still chuckling
over Abe’s words and repeating them to Fanny, the setter, as the two
boats drifted apart.

Tad watched the odd little craft until its owner was no longer visible
in the distance. Then he looked down at the coarse, homely pantaloons
that covered his legs. In spite of himself he could not help a little
smile as he thought of the spectacle he would present to one of his
carefully attired schoolmates.

Abe saw the smile, and his face lit with pleasure.

“Like ’em, Tad?” he asked.

“You bet,” said Tad stoutly. “But listen, Abe, you oughtn’t to do this
for me. How much does Mr. Gentry pay you, anyway?”

“That’s all right,” replied the big backwoodsman, grinning proudly. “I
git eight dollars a month an’ my steamboat passage home.”

And with that he vaulted to the fore deck and picked up the oars.




CHAPTER VII


The current set over strongly toward the Kentucky shore that afternoon,
and soon they found themselves swinging around the outer side of an
immense bend. At noon they had been heading almost due south. By three
o’clock they were running northwest, and an hour later they were
carried over to the Missouri side as another great sweep began, this
time to the left.

“That must be New Madrid,” said Allen. “The river makes a big S, an’
the town lays right in the second bend.”

They saw a settlement of twenty or thirty houses sprawled along the
bank, with a white church rising from trees above the landing. The
river ran fast around the bend, and Abe had left the oars to man the
steering-sweep. “Want to land?” he shouted. “Guess we don’t need
nothin’,” said Allen. “After hearin’ what happened to that trader
feller at New Madrid I’d jest as leave sleep farther down.”

They shot past the drowsy town and swung southward again with the
hurrying brown flood. Instead of the wilderness of willow-clad banks
and reedy marshes past which they had been drifting, the Missouri shore
stretched away here in broad acres of plowed ground.

At sunset they saw ahead of them a big, white-painted house set among
trees on a knoll. A broad, rolling lawn stretched down from it to the
river, and there were barns and outbuildings half hidden by shrubbery
at the rear. Beyond the expanse of lawn and nearer the river, was a
less pretentious house, flanked by a row of trim cabins. There were a
dozen or more of these, each with its small garden and a curl of blue
smoke coming from the chimney.

“Golly,” said Abe, “ain’t that a pretty layout? S’pose we could git
some good clear water here? I’m all clogged up with yaller mud,
drinkin’ this river water. Let’s land anyhow.”

He steered inshore and tossed a snubbing-rope over one of the piles at
the end of the little landing. When they had made the _Katy Roby_ fast,
Abe and Allen went up the path toward the smaller house at the end of
the line of cabins.

A big man in riding-boots and a wide-brimmed black hat was sitting
on the veranda. He had a long, drooping mustache from which a black
cigar protruded at a ferocious angle. Altogether he did not look
particularly hospitable. Abe stood awkwardly at the foot of the steps.

“Evenin’,” said he. “I reckon a place as fine an’ handsome as this must
have a good well o’ water. Ef it ain’t too much trouble, we’d like to
fill up a kaig or two.”

The man got up and took the cigar from his mouth. Under the huge
mustache he smiled, and his whole expression grew more friendly.

“No trouble whatsomever, stranger,” he answered. “We have to watch out
down yere on account o’ these river scalawags that steals our shoats
an’ chickens. But now I know ye ain’t that breed o’ varmints, fo’ they
won’t drink nothin’ but straight Mississip’ water, one-third mud an’
two-thirds liquid. Bring yo bar’l right along up, an’ make yo’selves
free o’ the landin’, ef yo’re stayin’ all night.”

They rolled their big water-keg up to the plantation well, where a
couple of grinning darkies filled it for them.

As they came back past the row of slave shanties, a pleasant
smell of bacon and corn-pone drifted out to their nostrils. Half
a dozen negroes--strapping black field hands in cotton shirts and
trousers--lounged on the grass in front of the cabins. One drew weird
minor chords from a home-made banjo, and the others were “patting
Juba” as they swayed and sang.

Rolling bass and rich husky tenor blended in a throbbing harmony that
sent shivers of delight up and down Tad’s spine. It was the first time
he had ever heard negroes singing a plantation song. After they had
reached the landing and were getting supper aboard the flatboat, the
words still came drifting down to them:

  “Oh, I long fo’ to reach dat heavenly sho’,
     To meet ol’ Peter standin’ at de do’;
   He say to me, ‘Oh, how you do?
     Come set right yonner in de golden pew.’”

“Gosh,” said Abe, “those boys shore can sing.”

Allen nodded. “Ye’d oughter hear ’em when they git really worked up to
it,” said he. “That time I was down to Paducah, there was a big gang of
’em aboard the steamboat, bein’ took down to New Orleans. Sing! Boy,
you’d thought they was goin’ on a picnic!”

“Pore things,” said Abe.

“Aw, shucks,” Allen laughed. “Thar goes your tender-heartedness again,
Abe. ’Tain’t no use feelin’ sorry fer ’em, no more than cattle goin’ to
market.”

Abe shook his head, thoughtfully. “It’s not exactly the same,” he
said. “They _ain’t_ cattle, no matter how much folks say so. You take
it on a plantation like this one an’ they look to be well kept an’
happy enough. But s’pose this owner dies, or gits a new overseer. Right
off, mebbe inside a week’s time, they’re bein’ starved, or whipped, or
sold down the river--families broke up--everything changed.

“Misery comes to white folks, too, but at least they’ve got somethin’
to say about it. Looks like we have to have the slaves to raise cotton.
But we ought to make it more of a square deal.”

“Oh, well,” yawned Allen, “what’s the use of arguin’? ’Tain’t likely
any of us’ll ever be bothered about it, one way or t’other.”

They followed the overseer’s suggestion and spent that night tied up
at the plantation landing. The last thing Tad heard before he dropped
off to sleep was a broken strain of that barbaric music--a low, sobbing
croon, inexpressibly sad--borne down on the night wind from the slave
quarters.

The crew of the _Katy Roby_ were up betimes next morning.

“We’re runnin’ slow,” said Abe. “Got to do some rowin’ or we won’t be
in New Orleans on schedule. Come on thar, cooks an’ cook’s helpers, git
that fry-pan hot!” And he bent his long back to the oars with a vigor
that made the ash wood creak.

Within an hour they had left civilization behind them again and
were slipping down through the wildest-looking country they had yet
encountered. There were many islands, some hardly more than sand-bars
where the twisting, gnawing river was depositing the tons of yellow mud
it had eaten away, farther up. Jungles of tall cane lined the banks,
and often, when the current bore them through a narrow cut, they would
pass so close that the cane rattled along the side of the boat.

They were just entering one of these channels, sometime in the middle
of the afternoon, and Allen and Tad were speculating as to whether they
were yet in Tennessee, when Abe held up his hand for silence.

“Listen,” he said, after a moment. “Dogs barkin’, down in the
canebrake. Mebbe we’ll see what they’re a-huntin’.”

The others climbed to the fore deck and stood quiet, listening. Soon
they too heard the savage baying of the hounds, away to the south, and
as the current brought them nearer they watched the banks intently.

The sound was much closer now, and seemed to have changed in tone.
There were short breathless barks and an undercurrent of fierce
snarling.

“They’ve got somethin’, sure!” said Abe. “An’ if they ain’t too far
back from the river we’ll come in sight of ’em in a minute.”

“Look!” cried Tad.

As he pointed they saw a gaunt black bear, with two cubs running at her
side, dash across an opening in the canebrake not twenty yards away.

Close on their heels came the dogs--big mongrel hounds that leaped
abreast of the hindmost cub and pulled him down with murderous jaws.
The old bear had started into the cane on the far side of the opening
but turned at a scream from her luckless baby. With a rumbling growl
she rushed back into the tangle of dogs, knocking them to right and
left with vicious blows of her great forepaws.

The other cub had taken to the water and was swimming strongly out
across the channel.

“Back water with the oars!” shouted Abe from the stern. And lifting
the long sweep from its chocks, he thrust it down into the mud like a
setting-pole. The flatboat slackened speed and came to a stop. Leaning
far out over the gunwale and stretching his long arm downward, Abe
gripped the young bear by the scruff of the neck and hauled him aboard,
dripping and gasping.

Meanwhile events had developed swiftly on the shore. There was a noise
of running feet, and a hunter in deerskin burst out of the cane. As he
appeared, the mother bear left her dead cub and plunged into the river.
The next second the man came bounding after her, with no weapon but the
long hunting-knife he gripped in his right hand.

The bear saw the flatboat, hesitated, and doubled back to the left,
only to meet the hunter, who sprang to bar her last path of escape.
With a grunt of rage the great black beast surged up on her hind feet
and faced this enemy, standing chest-deep in the water before her.

There was something deadly about the slow advance of the bear, her
head sunk between hulking shoulders, and her lips curled back savagely
over her great, keen eye-teeth. Cool and tense, the man pulled off
his coonskin cap with his left hand. And at the moment when the bear
lunged toward him, he waved the furry headgear, with its big, flapping
tail, almost in her face. There was a great splash of water as the
enraged brute struck downward at the moving object. And so swiftly
that the boys’ eyes could scarcely follow it, the hunter’s foot-long
blade was driven home behind her left shoulder. A vivid spurt of
crimson tinged the water, and the huge animal made for the shore with
a convulsive bound that swept her adversary off his feet. He was up
the next instant, shaking the water out of his hair, and with the knife
held ready, he followed his victim up the bank. There was no need
for another blow. Halfway out of the water, the bear had coughed and
stumbled, and when he reached her there was only a limp furry bulk at
the edge of the cane.

The crew of the flatboat had watched this encounter, speechless except
for a shout or two of encouragement. Now, as the victor drove off the
dogs and stooped to examine the slain cub, Allen looked around with a
grin of admiration.

“Phew!” he breathed. “No wonder they call ’em half a horse an’ half an
alligator. Chase a b’ar ’cross country, ketch up with her, an’ kill her
with a knife in four foot o’ water! Glory be!”

The man wrung some of the water out of his fringed buckskin shirt, then
turned toward the _Katy Roby_. Abe was still holding the boat against
the current, bracing his weight on the long steering-sweep. It was to
him that the hunter now addressed himself.

“Wal, stranger,” he said, “who does that-air cub belong to--you or me?”
He spoke without heat, in a clear, drawling voice that had a steely
ring in its undertone.

Abe was silent, looking back at him appraisingly. The man was
big-framed, powerfully muscled, lean as a stag. He had straight black
hair, worn long, after the fashion of the Tennessee hunters. His
strong, fearless face with its big hooked nose looked like an Indian’s.

“Ye see, b’ar scalps is wu’th a dollar apiece in Nashville,” the hunter
proceeded. “The old un’s skin’ll bring mebbe four dollars more, but
I’ve been trackin’ these three fer nigh a week. That’s how I make my
livin’, mostly.”

Abe looked down at the cub, which squatted between Tad’s knees, licking
its fur dry with a long pink tongue.

“’Pears like the leetle feller got away, fair an’ square,” he replied.
“He’d have made the other bank if we hadn’t been thar to pick him up.
An’ I reckon the boy here would like to keep him. Tell ye what I’ll do.
I’ll wrastle ye fer him.”

The man on the bank shot a keen glance at Abe. “Huh!” said he. “Good
’nough. Quick as I kin git this job done, we’ll slip on down to the
next cleared spot an’ see ’bout it.”

With that he stooped and deftly cut a circle around the head of the
dead cub, lifting off its scalp with the ears attached. Then he set to
work on the big bear and in an incredibly short space of time, he had
stripped off the heavy pelt and rolled it up, hair inside. From the
haunches he cut some chunks of meat which he pierced with a sharp stick
and swung over his shoulder. And whistling to the hounds, he picked up
his rifle and powder-horn and set out along the bank.

Abe kept the boat within sight of him except when the high cane
occasionally swallowed him up. The lanky Indiana boy had little to say
as he worked the boat slowly down-channel.

“What about it, Abe?” chattered Allen. “Think ye kin throw him? He
looks powerful stout to me. Don’t you count on keepin’ that b’ar too
durn much, Tad.”

But Tad, looking up into the weather-tanned countenance of the
steersman, saw a twinkle, deep in the gray eyes, that reassured him.

“Why,” said he to Allen, “you told me yourself he could throw anybody
on the river.”

“On Little Pigeon, that was,” Allen amended. “I didn’t say nothin’
’bout the Mississippi.”

Below them a sandy point thrust out from the Tennessee bank, where
the river was making land faster than the rank growth could cover it.
There the hunter paused and waved to them to come ashore. They tied the
flatboat to a stump a little way above, where there was water enough to
land, and strolled down to the sand-bar. Tad led the cub by a piece of
rope knotted about its neck.

The stranger was already stripping for action. He pulled off his
leather hunting-frock and his inside shirt of wool and stood forth
naked to the waist, his big, muscular arms and mighty chest gleaming in
the sun. Abe made similar preparations. To Tad’s joy, the long-limbed
Hoosier appeared no less impressive than his rival. There was a look
of whalebone toughness in the tall lad’s physique that made up for any
difference in bulk.

As they faced each other, the hunter seemed to swell, visibly, like a
ruffling rooster.

“Whoopee!” he crowed. “I’m the high-an’-mighty boss b’ar-killer o’ the
Tennessee bottoms. When I open my mouth all the big b’ars an’ little
b’ars fer a hundred mile up an’ down the river start skedaddlin’. I’d
ruther wrastle than eat, an’ I give ye warnin’, I’m gwine ter git that
cub, or my name ain’t Davy Crockett!”

He accompanied all this with a droll flapping of the arms, and as he
shouted the last words he launched himself through the air at his young
adversary.




CHAPTER VIII


That was a wrestling-match that Tad never forgot. Abe met the opening
rush of the Tennesseean with an old trick, but a good one. Crouching
just at the right time, he caught the hunter around the knees and
lifted him, letting the momentum of his charge carry him on over Abe’s
shoulder. Instantly the young Hoosier spun about and gripped his
rival’s body almost before it touched the ground. But Crockett broke
the hold with a great writhing twist and rolled over to light on his
feet like a fighting cat.

After that they came together more cautiously, each seeming to realize
that he was dealing with an opponent beyond the common run. They
stepped in and out with a swift padding of moccasined feet, their hands
sparring for grips. Twice they went down together, with Abe underneath,
for he was finding his antagonist tremendously fast and strong. But the
lanky flatboatman could turn quickly, too, and he refused to stay under
long enough to have his shoulders pinned to the sand.

Minutes went by, and still the two kept up their furious pace. It
was hot in the sun. Sweat streamed from their bodies, and they panted
hoarsely each time they came to grips. But there was no easing off in
the ferocity of their attack.

To Tad, watching breathlessly and shouting encouragement to his
champion, came the thought that here perhaps Abe had met his match. A
sudden lightning-like shift of the hunter’s grip and a sharp heave of
his shoulders brought the tall youngster to earth yet again, and the
watchers could see that this time Abe was hard put to it to defend
himself. He was on his right side, with the powerful Crockett partly on
top of him, struggling to turn him with a half nelson--a hold in which
the hunter’s left arm was used as a lever under Abe’s left arm and
around the back of his neck.

The Hoosier’s long legs were spread in a wide V to brace him, and he
seemed to be making a last desperate resistance against a defeat he
could not avoid.

“Gosh,” groaned Tad, as he saw Abe’s shoulders slowly giving.

“Hol’ on!” Allen breathed. “He ain’t done yet.”

And almost before the words had left his mouth, the whole complexion
of the bout had changed. With a sudden tremendous twist, Abe rolled
over to his right side, breaking the hold, and as he turned, his long,
strong legs wound themselves swiftly about the hunter’s middle.

“Hooray!” yelled Allen. “I was waitin’ fer that. Watch, now, when he
puts the clamps on!”

The Tennesseean strove fiercely to break loose, but those fence-rail
legs of Abe’s were as tough as hickory. He locked them at the ankles,
and as his knees straightened, the hunter’s breath came in short, hard
gasps. And slowly Abe began to turn him over.

As the minutes passed, Crockett’s endurance ebbed. He made one final
try, fighting with the fury of a wildcat to escape from the vise in
which he was gripped. Then as his muscles relaxed, his young antagonist
pressed him downward with his shoulders squarely on the ground.

“Say ‘’nough’?” panted Abe. But Crockett had no breath to speak. He
moved his head in a weary gesture of assent.

The Indiana boy unwound his legs and got up, stiffly, reaching out a
hand to the defeated bear-hunter. Crockett stumbled to his feet and
stood feeling gingerly of his ribs.

“Yuh-yuh--you keep the b’ar!” he gasped when enough of his wind
returned, and a sort of rueful grin wrinkled his leather-brown face.

The wrestlers were both in such perfect condition that they were soon
feeling as fit as ever. Abe turned from his playful mauling of the bear
cub to speak to his late opponent. “We didn’t say, at the start-off,
whether this yere match was one fall or best two out o’ three,” he
said. “What say--want to try another?”

“No, sir,” replied the hunter promptly. “That’s mighty square of you,
but I reckon I know when I’m beat. I’ve wrastled with plenty o’ good
ones an’ never been thrown till now. But I never tackled a feller as
strong as you, nor as long. All arms an’ legs--iron legs, at that.

“Wal, boys,” he cried, “what are ye--hungry? How ’bout some b’ar steak,
cooked fresh, Injun fashion?”

The sun was getting low and all of the flatboat hands had good
appetites. They went to work with a will, therefore, brought in dry
wood by the armful, and soon were broiling the meat on green sticks
over a hot fire.

It was Tad’s first taste of bear, and he was not at all sure he liked
it at the start. But soon he was eating it like the rest, with gusto.
Allen brought a pan and some cups down from the boat, and they finished
with a round of tea.

Crockett smacked his lips over the steaming beverage. “Boy, howdy!”
said he. “I ain’t had a cup fer close to a month. This b’ar-huntin’ is
a good trade, but it makes ye give up a lot o’ refinements.

“Ye know,” he said, and hesitated, blushing a little, “I was up to
Washington fer the last term o’ Congress--sent up to represent the
folks in this part o’ Tennessee. But I never could git accustomed to
city ways. I’d git to feelin’ jest about starved fer a mess o’ b’ar’s
meat every once in so often. An’ it’s the same way now I’m back home
here, roamin’ through the woods an’ the canebrake; I git a hankerin’
sometimes fer jelly-cake an’ tea.

“Ever thought about goin’ in fer politics, Longshanks?”

It was Abe’s turn to blush. “I’ve thought about a heap o’ things,” he
answered gruffly. “Politics, fer one, because I like to make speeches
an’ get a crowd to listen to me. What I’d like to be most, though, is a
good lawyer.”

Allen haw-hawed loudly at this confession, but Davy Crockett listened
with respect.

“I’ll wager you’ll git thar,” he nodded. “Though I don’t hold much
with lawyers, myself. They’re too slick--always up to some crooked
business.”

Abe warmed up at once. “That’s exactly the reason,” said he. “I want
to be a good enough lawyer to beat some o’ the smart ones at their own
game. A good lawyer kin be a powerful lot o’ help to folks that’s in
trouble.”

He settled down again in his place before the fire, crossing his long
legs and chuckling reminiscently as he looked at Allen. “Puts me in
mind of old Jeff Slocum,” said he. “A lot of us boys saw him lyin’ side
o’ the road one blizzardy night. He’d been thrown out o’ the tavern an
hour before an’ started fer home too drunk to stagger. We all thought
’twas jest a log o’ wood or some brush that the snow was beginnin’
to cover, but I wasn’t dead sure an’ went back. Thar he lay, half
drifted over, an’ right on the edge o’ freezin’. So I threw him over
my shoulder an’ lugged him home to his cabin. I got a fire goin’ an’
rubbed him with snow an’ finally thawed him out, an’ thanks to all the
red-eye he’d drunk, he was ’round in a week, right as ever.

“But come summer he got in trouble again, an’ that time I couldn’t
help him a particle. Seems like some o’ his shoats got into Newt
Padgett’s bean-patch an’ dug things up pretty general. An’ Newt, bein’
the meanest man on the whole creek, hauled Jeff into court. He got
a judgment fer more’n Jeff ever owned, spite o’ the fact that the
trouble all rose from Newt bein’ too mean to keep his fences up.

“I sure wished right then that I was a lawyer,” Abe finished. “I
believe I could have saved Jeff’s bacon.”

“You’ve got the right idee,” said the bear-hunter. “Whar the land is
bein’ settled up so fast, thar’s bound to be more an’ more law, and
with it more lawyers. An’ this country sure needs the kind o’ lawyers
that you aim to be, ’stid o’ the other kind.

“Speakin’ fer myself, I don’t keer so much about law as I do about
independence. When I’ve got the ol’ rifle along I don’t need laws to
protect me. Here in Tennessee it’s gittin’ ’most too civilized now. I
don’t take no comfort when I shoot, fer fear I’ll hit some one. I’ve
been thinkin’ some about goin’ up the Missouri or down Mexico way. As
long as that’s more b’ars than people, I kin stand ’most any sort o’
country. But soon as the folks ketches up on the b’ars, I figger it’s
gittin’ too crowded.”

Crockett rose and stretched his powerful frame.

“Sun’s a-settin’ an’ I’ve got ’most ten miles to travel back to my
camp,” he said. “Much obleeged fer your company an’ fer the wrastlin’
lesson. If you aim to push on tonight, you’ll be out o’ this cut within
two mile, an’ it’s open river fer quite a ways below.”

They bade him farewell and saw him slip into the tangled cane silently
as an Indian, the big dogs trotting at his heels. Then they boarded the
flatboat once more, and pushed off.

Tad, searching among the gear in the _Katy Roby’s_ hold, found a light
chain which he substituted for the rope about the cub’s neck, and
fastened him to a staple amidships, with a pile of dry grass for a bed.

The little black fellow pulled comically at the chain with his paws,
tested its length by prowling back and forth a few times, and finally
curled up in his nest for a nap. Tad left him snoring and tiptoed
forward where Abe was pulling at the oars.

The tall Hoosier worked awhile in silence, his face somber in the
gathering dusk. Then a grin twisted the corners of his big mouth.
“Lucky thing fer me this Crockett feller didn’t take me up on another
fall,” said he. “I was closer to gittin’ my deserts that time than I
ever remember. He’d have thrown me sure, I reckon. Golly, what a man!”

Tad stoutly pooh-poohed the idea that Davy Crockett, or any other
human, could take the measure of his hero. But Abe smiled and shook his
head.

“’Tain’t jest that he was strong,” he explained. “There’s plenty o’
big, powerful men. But I never hooked up with one that was faster on
his feet or had more grit.”

Night had fallen when they reached the end of the cut, and they could
see little of the river below except a wide, shadowy expanse of water
with indistinct lines of shore receding on either hand.

“Sleepy, Tad?” asked Abe. “If ye ain’t, we’d better keep a double
look-out fer snags an’ sand-reefs. I’m a-goin’ right on till Allen
wakes up an’ spells me.”

The boy took up his position squatting in the bow, his gaze straining
into the dark ahead. There was no noise except the lap of the hurrying
river around the flatboat’s sides and the occasional soft creak of the
tholepins. The deck heaved slightly, with a steady, breathing motion,
as Abe’s moccasins trod backward and forward, and the long sweeps
pulled through the water.

Tad, his fancy thrilled at first by the vast loneliness around them and
the sense of mystery and adventure in their silent downward voyage,
began to feel sleepy after an hour or two. He shifted his position
again and again, to shake himself awake, but his head would nod in
spite of all his efforts.

Suddenly there came sounds from the left bank, half a mile away, that
made him start bolt upright, wide awake and listening.

A shout carried across the water, menacing and sharp. There was an
interval of a few seconds and then an eager whimper reached them,
followed by a deep, bell-like tone--the baying of a hound. Lights
appeared, glimmering in jerky movements along the shore. Another shout
or two followed, and then everything was quiet. The lights disappeared
one by one, and the desolate, brooding dark settled once more over the
face of the river.

“What was it, Abe?” whispered the boy.

“Dunno,” said Abe. “No way o’ tellin’. But it sure did give me the cold
creeps; didn’t it you?”

“Yes,” shivered Tad. He was no longer sleepy. With every sense on the
alert, he watched the dim banks and the dusky water ahead. Thoughts of
the terrible Murrell and other cold-blooded rogues of the river crossed
his mind. For nearly half an hour he expected momentarily to see danger
of some kind develop. Then, just as he was lulling himself into a sense
of security, another startling thing happened.

Directly in their path ahead, Tad thought he made out a dark object
drifting with the current. He scrambled to his knees, peering fixedly
at the spot, and Abe stopped rowing. “What d’ye see?” asked the big
oarsman in a low voice.

“Just a floating log, I think,” Tad whispered, “only I thought I saw it
move.”

The dark object was only a dozen yards away now, and they could
distinguish the outline of an uprooted tree trunk. Abe was just
changing the flatboat’s course with a vigorous pull on the starboard
oar when Tad gave a sudden exclamation. A part of the log had seemed
to separate from the main trunk and had slid off with a considerable
splash into the river.

“Look!” cried Tad, pointing to the other side of the floating snag. A
dark, round object which had been drawing rapidly away to the right
disappeared under water at the boy’s exclamation. And though they
watched intently while they passed the log, and for many minutes after,
they had no further glimpse of it.

“That must have been a man, swimmin’,” said Abe at length. “Too big fer
a muskrat or a turtle. Didn’t look like a panther nor a b’ar. Runaway
slave, I reckon. Wal, the pore devil needn’t have been so scairt of
us.”

Allen came forward, wakened by the talk, and heard their story. “That’s
probably what the commotion on shore was about,” he said. “You fellers
is both tired, so I’ll take her down awhile, jest driftin’. Won’t need
a look-out that way.”

And Abe and Tad, going aft to their blankets, were soundly sleeping
within ten minutes.




CHAPTER IX


The little bear took very kindly to his new home. He slept well and
rose to stretch himself hungrily when the first beam of sunlight came
over the brown water. Softly he padded about the half circle of which
his chain was the radius, but there seemed to be nothing to eat within
reach. Rolled up in a blanket near by, however, he found one of the
queer-smelling two-legged creatures that had been kind to him the day
before, and being of an inquisitive turn of mind he immediately thrust
a moist little black snout between the blanket and the sleeper’s neck.

Tad, awakened by the touch of the cub’s cold nose, let out a squeal and
rolled violently over on to Abe, who woke in his turn, and scrambled
up, reaching for an ax.

“Haw!” roared Allen. “Haw, haw, haw! Might think the ol’ Scratch
himself was arter ye! Wal, he got ye up anyhow.”

Abe and Tad rubbed their eyes and joined sheepishly in the laughter.
And the cub, after looking at them all solemnly, returned to his
investigation of Tad’s blanket.

“This little feller’s got to have a name,” chuckled Abe. “He acts like
he’s adopted us fer keeps, an’ if he’s goin’ to be a full-fledged hand
we’ll have to call him somethin’.”

“Let’s christen him Poke,” said Tad. “He’s always into everything.” And
Poke was his name from that moment on.

Allen had tied up to the shore after midnight and risen to start again
at dawn. Now they were drifting steadily down the middle of a reach
where there was no immediate occasion for steering, and Allen sat down
with the others amidships at breakfast. He was weary and cross from his
vigil at the sweep.

“See here,” he demanded as Poke looked up hopefully after his third
helping of johnny-cake, “how in Tarnation are we ever a-goin’ to feed
this brute? We ain’t provisioned fer but two hands, an’ this b’ar eats
more’n a grown man.”

Abe went on calmly with his breakfast. “I didn’t save him an’ wrastle
fer him jest to throw him back in the river,” he said. “Here, he kin
have mine.” And placing his own piece of corn-bread in front of the
greedy little bear, he rose, whistling, to take up his morning’s labor
at the bow oars.

“Tad,” he called, from the fore deck, “you’re the rightful owner of
this b’ar. S’pose you git out that hand-line an’ bait it an’ see if ye
can’t save the rations by puttin’ us on a fish diet fer a day or two.”

The boy was only too glad to try. He had done some fishing farther up
the river, but without any notable results.

“Ought to bite good, today,” said Allen, sniffing the breeze with a
knowing air. “Feels like it’s comin’ on to rain, soon--tonight, mebbe.
That’ll bring ’em up.”

Tad dropped his baited hook over the side and sat down comfortably,
prepared for a tedious wait. But scarcely had the length of the line
run out, when he felt such a tug on the other end that it nearly pulled
him overboard. He held fast, bracing his feet, and shouted excitedly
for aid. Allen took hold with him.

“Huh,” he grunted. “Must be snagged, I reckon. Wal, we can’t afford to
lose the hook. Nothin’ for it but pull her in.”

Together they hauled the line aboard hand over hand. There seemed to be
a heavy, inert weight attached to it.

“Golly,” growled Allen, “all this work jest to turn loose a durned ol’
water-logged root or somethin’!”

But Tad was still pulling manfully. “Look!” he cried. “It’s no
snag--it’s a fish--a catfish--great jumping catamounts, what a fish!
How’re we going to land him?”

Allen gave one astounded glance over the side and dashed for the
bucket-hook, a stout sapling with an upward-forking branch at the lower
end. While Tad held the nose of the big fish at the surface, Allen
thrust down the wooden hook and brought it up under one of the gills.
“Now,” he cried, “both together, heave!”

And out of the water came a great, grizzled mud cat, so heavy that it
took all their strength to haul him over the gunwale. The big fish
thrashed ponderously about for a moment and then lay quiet.

“He’s more’n four-foot long,” estimated Allen, “an’ he’ll tip
seventy-five pound if he will an ounce. By gum, that’s the biggest ol’
catfish I ever caught.”

“_You_ caught!” snorted Abe, ambling aft to view the prize. “All the
claim you’ve got on this fish is that you’re goin’ to cook him. This is
Tad’s fish.”

He looked the catch over with an appraising eye. “Pretty fair-sized
catfish for such a young one,” he remarked. “He’s only about forty year
old. You kin tell by the whiskers. His ain’t even turned gray yet.”

“Humph!” grunted Allen suspiciously.

“’Course,” Abe went on, “you ain’t had the opportunities for observin’
catfish that I’ve been favored with. When I was workin’ on the Anderson
Creek ferry, up on the Ohio, there was an old fisherman that used to
set thar in his boat day after day. He had two half-inch hemp ropes
over the side. One was his anchor rope an’ the other was his line. He
never caught any small fish because on the end o’ this line he used the
hook off an ox-chain, baited with a half a ham.

“One day he let out a holler we could hear clear across the Ohio, an’
we saw him wavin’ his arms an’ workin’ like all git out. Then by ’n’
by he come a-rowin’ over our way. It was slow pullin’, an’ the stern
o’ the skiff was ’way down in the water, with the bow half out. When
he got alongside we saw a real fish. The ol’ feller had hauled him in
till his nose was up against the stern, an’ then lashed the rope to a
thwart, an’ hit him in the head with an ax. We helped him reach the
landin’ an’ rigged a tackle an’ fall, an’ with two teams o’ horses we
managed to git the critter on shore.

“Eh? What did he weigh? Wal, now I don’t jest quite recollect, but
it was either four hundred and eighty-five pound or five hundred and
eighty-four--my memory don’t run to figgers. The real interestin’
part was his age. Riveted into his tail was a brass plate, marked
with a man’s name an’ the year 1705. Seems like this ol’ fisherman’s
grandfather had caught the fish ’way back more’n a hundred years ago
an’ marked him an’ turned him loose.

“Talk about whiskers--why, this one had a full beard, jest as white as
snow, an’ I reckon his eyes had gone back on him in his old age, fer he
wore a pair o’ heavy-bowed spectacles.”

“The fish?” asked Tad, gaping with astonishment.

“No,” chuckled Abe, “the grandfather.” And he returned to his oars.

“Humph!” said Allen again, this time with a real snort. “Whar you ever
got the name of ‘Honest Abe’ is more’n I know. Honest! Why, thar ain’t
a bigger liar from the Falls o’ the Ohio to the Gulf o’ Mexico!”

They skinned the huge mud cat and cut it in two, putting the larger
part in a cool place, wrapped in wet weeds. Tad was just building
the fire preparatory to cooking the rest of the fish, when Abe spoke
suddenly from the forward deck.

“Look astern, thar, boys,” he said. They stood up, their eyes sweeping
the river to the north. There were the usual two or three flatboats in
the distance and the smoke of a steamer above the last bend. But less
than a quarter of a mile behind them, and drawing rapidly nearer, they
saw a big rowboat with oars flashing in quick rhythm along its sides.

As the craft approached, it swung out a little to one side, and they
saw that it was a good-sized barge, rowed by six powerful negroes. Four
white men sat in the stern sheets, cradling shot-guns in the crook of
their arms. They drew up alongside the _Katy Roby_, perhaps twenty
yards distant, and at a word of command the blacks rested on their
oars. For a moment the occupants of the two boats studied each other in
silence. The white men aboard the barge were dressed in the elegant,
careless fashion of southern planters. Their faces were unsmiling, very
polite, very hard-eyed.

One of them nodded. “We’re out after a runaway nigger,” he said, in an
even tone. “Maybe you can tell us where he is, suh.”

Abe straightened up, towering from the fore deck like a young Goliath.
His voice had the ring of steel in it, and his speech, as always at
tense moments, was singularly free from the slipshod backwoods dialect.

“He’s not aboard here,” he answered, “and as far as we know we haven’t
seen him.”

There were whispers among the men in the barge. Then the spokesman,
with another look at Abe, made an impatient gesture to the rowers, and
the craft was speedily under way once more.

“What did I tell ye last night?” said Allen, when they were out of
earshot. “That’s what all the noise was about on shore. They must ha’
tracked him to the river with bloodhounds. Gosh all fishhooks, Abe! I
figgered they was goin’ to search us, sure. Did ye see them guns!”

“Yep,” said Abe. “They could ha’ done it fast ’nough if they’d wanted
to.”

The _Katy Roby_ held her course all day, proceeding at the leisurely
gait that seemed so well suited to her buxom lines. The sky grew more
and more overcast, and by afternoon a steady drizzle of rain began to
fall. There was little to do but stay under cover as much as possible,
swap yarns, and play with Poke, now apparently quite at home in his new
surroundings.

It was during Allen’s trick at the oars, when Tad and Abe were lying
under the shelter of a tarpaulin, that the younger boy brought up a
subject always close to the surface of his mind.

“Abe,” he said, “how long ought it to take that letter of mine to reach
New Orleans?”

Abe put down the tattered copy of Shakespeare’s tragedies he was
reading. “Let’s see,” he pondered. “That was a week ago yesterday we
went ashore, up thar. S’pose the steamboat happened along right off the
next day, like the store feller said. That would give a week--sartin
sure--that’s time enough fer ’em to git to New Orleans, easy. I’ll jest
wager your Paw is a-readin’ that letter an’ congratulatin’ hisself
right this minute.”

“Gee,” sighed the boy, “I’ll feel better when I know for sure that he’s
got it and isn’t worrying any longer!”

It was well on in the afternoon and the dismal sky was bringing an
early dusk when they sighted the barge once more, returning upstream.
It passed fairly close, the oars still beating in brisk time against
the current. But this time there was a fifth figure among the armed
white men in the stern. A big negro, his naked back and shoulders
gleaming darkly in the rain, crouched in the middle of the group. They
could not see his face, but there were terror and despair in every line
of his cowering body.

As they watched the boat they saw it veer over in the direction of a
small island they had passed in midstream a mile or so above.

“That’s whar they’ll fix him,” said Allen grimly.

“What do you mean--kill him?” asked Tad.

“Not a mite of it,” the other replied. “Ye don’t ketch them fellers
throwin’ away a thousand dollars. They’ll make him wish he hadn’t,
though. The way I’ve heard tell about it, they’ll likely start a
bonfire, thar on the island, an’ take a gunbar’l, or mebbe a reg’lar
iron made fer the job, an’ burn a big mark on to his chest an’ arms.
Arter he gits well that brand’ll allers be on him, so the overseers kin
watch him extra keerful an’ give him a double dose o’ the whip if he
looks sideways.”

“Yes,” said Abe, sober-faced, “as fur as he’s concerned, he’d be a heap
better off dead.”

They tied up to a big cottonwood on the Arkansas side, that night, and
Tad lay a long time awake, listening to the ceaseless thud of the rain
on wet planking and dripping canvas. The thought of the runaway negro,
captured after his break for freedom and dragged back to the torture,
seemed to haunt him. At last the monotone of the rain was broken by a
shivery squall--the cry of a wildcat, somewhere back in the brush. Poke
roused himself with an uneasy grunt, and Tad rolled over, pulling the
blanket tighter about him.

“That you, Tad?” came Abe’s low voice. “I can’t git comfortable,
neither. That poor devil gittin’ caught that way ’pears to have upsot
me. Well, thar ain’t much we kin do about it. Let’s go to sleep.”

And whether Abe was successful himself or not, his suggestion seemed to
be all that Tad needed, for he dropped off at once into deep slumber.

The rain continued falling steadily for the next two days, and with it
the water began to rise. They watched it climb inch by inch as they
drifted south, till the yellow tide was swirling halfway up the tree
trunks and broadening into vast lakes in the lower lands.

It was difficult, often, to pick out the course of the main river, for
except where lines of cottonwoods fringed the banks, it was all one
dreary expanse under the sullen beat of the rain.

Everything was wet--clothes, blankets, food. Even Allen’s banjo was
temporarily out of commission. The boys’ spirits flagged, and if it had
not been for the antics of the little bear and an occasional story from
Abe, their party would have been glum indeed.

At last, in the late afternoon of the second day, there was a shift in
the wind and the clouds began to break, with hazy shafts of pink and
gold streaming through. In the midst of their jubilation, Allen, who
had the steering-oar, pointed a finger toward the Tennessee shore.

“Look,” he cried, “a steamboat landin’ an’ houses! That’s Memphis,
boys, sure as you’re born!” And leaning heavily against the sweep, he
swung the flatboat’s bow over toward the town.




CHAPTER X


Memphis, in 1828, was little more than a raw hamlet straggling along
the river. It had a big landing-stage for steamers and a series of
smaller wharves where the arks and keel-boats from upstream could tie
up. There were half a hundred craft of all sorts and sizes hitched
to the mooring-posts when the _Katy Roby_ drew alongside, for nearly
every flatboat crew made a stop of a day or a night at Memphis. It
was the largest town between St. Louis and New Orleans and handled a
considerable commerce with the back country.

The boys worked the boat’s nose in between other broadhorns until they
could get a rope fast, and Allen retired to the shelter amidships to
shave and spruce himself up.

“Reckon I’ll step ashore an’ see what prices they’re offerin’ fer corn
an’ pork,” he remarked, endeavoring to part his hair with the aid of a
piece of broken mirror.

“Yes,” said Abe, “an’ don’t fergit to take note o’ the number o’ purty
gals an’ the color o’ their dresses. Tad an’ me, we’ll stick along here
an’ teach this no-’count Poke some new tricks.”

They cooked supper, and as Allen did not return at dusk, they ate it,
sitting together on the edge of the fore deck. There were numerous
boatmen joking, swearing, and passing the time of day in the craft
about them. Several of the crews were familiar to them from earlier
meetings along the river, and there was much cheerful banter about
Abe’s towering frame. He took it all with his customary grin and gave
them as good as they sent.

“Say, Hoosier,” yelled one jolly-looking, red-bearded keel-boat man,
“how long are them shanks o’ yourn, anyhow?”

“Jest the proper length,” Abe returned. “They’re jest exactly long
enough to reach the ground.”

Gradually the talk and laughter quieted down as darkness fell. By nine
o’clock the river front was quiet except for the gurgle of the high
water sweeping past and an occasional burst of song from roisterers in
the town.

Abe waited patiently until sometime close to midnight. Then he nudged
the drowsy Tad awake and told him to mind the boat while he went ashore
after Allen.

Tad succeeded in propping his eyes open for half an hour, and at the
end of that time he saw a huge, dim shape lurching along the dock. As
it reached the bow of the _Katy Roby_ it became recognizable as Abe,
carrying a limp body over his shoulder.

Tad leaped up, startled.

“What is it--is Allen hurt?” he whispered.

“No,” Abe replied, quietly. “He’s drunk.”

They took off some of his clothes and wrapped him in his blanket. Then
Abe stretched his big arms and spat over the gunwale disgustedly.

“There’s no law to stop a feller from makin’ a fool of himself,” he
remarked. “Only ye’d think plain common sense ought to tell him.” And
with that they went to bed.

Allen made a very unheroic figure next morning. His complexion was a
sort of greenish yellow, and he refused all food with groans.

“What about prices on the cargo?” Abe asked him. “Want to stay an’
unload some?”

Allen shook his head. “Too cheap,” said he. “Let’s hold the stuff
fer New Orleans an’ git thar as soon as we kin.” Whereupon he rolled
over once more and lay in a miserable heap while Abe and Tad made
preparations for departure.

They needed sugar and white flour, and before casting off, Abe made a
hurried trip up into the town to get them.

When he came back his face was grave.

“They say there’s a heap o’ damage from the high water all along below
here,” he told Tad. “We’ll have to watch sharp and help folks out whar
we kin. An’ then I heard another piece o’ news. They say this outlaw
John Murrell is back from up river, an’ him an’ his gang are startin’
to make life miserable fer the planters betwixt here an’ Natchez. The
storekeeper wanted to skeer me, I reckon. He claimed Murrell would sink
a flatboat an’ drown the crew fer a ten-dollar note. But I don’t pay
much heed to that sort o’ talk.

“An’ anyhow, if he wants our ten dollars, let him try it. I’d sort o’
like to see Mr. Murrell fer myself an’ find out if he’s such a terrible
feller.”

Tad was not quite so sure he wanted to test the notorious outlaw’s
mettle, but he agreed that it might be thrilling to get a glimpse of
him.

They got off before the morning was far advanced, and soon overtook
some of the other flatboats which had started before them. Abe took a
keen delight in overhauling them, one after another, and tossing back a
gibe or two at each vessel they passed.

At length there was only one craft left in sight ahead of them--a long,
trimly-built keel-boat, with lines that were almost graceful compared
to those of the _Katy Roby_. She was making good headway, due to the
efforts of a husky bow-oarsman, but Abe’s extra-long sweeps and the
tremendous power he put into his stroke were rapidly eating up the
distance between the two boats.

Just as the bow of the broadhorn drew even with her rival’s
steering-oar, another figure sprang to the fore deck of the keel-boat.
It was the big red-bearded river-man who had asked Abe about the length
of his legs. He swung an arm in vigorous gesture, and his voice roared
out across the water.

“Git down from thar, ye lousy swab,” he cried to the oarsman. “Let
somebody pull that knows a sweep from a shovel.”

The rower hastened to surrender the great, clumsy oars and scramble
down, out of the way. And then indeed began a race! The slenderer lines
of the keel-boat gave her a slight advantage, which Abe had to overcome
by the sheer force of his strokes. During that moment while the oars
were changing hands, the tall Indiana boy quickened the beat of his
swing and succeeded in pulling up till he was a shade ahead of the
other craft. From this point he could watch his rival without turning
his head, while the redbeard was forced to crane his neck in order to
see what Abe was doing.

So they went, side by side, for the best part of a mile, the muddy
water churning in yellow foam behind them. The other four men in the
keel-boat’s crew bellowed constant encouragement to their mate, and one
of them seized the steering-sweep, sculling from side to side to help
them along. Tad saw this maneuver and promptly matched it by doing the
same thing with the _Katy Roby’s_ stern oar.

At the end of ten minutes the furious pace began to tell on the
red-whiskered rower. He was wilting visibly, while Abe, who had been at
it for more than an hour, was still pulling as strongly as ever.

One of the keel-boat men climbed to the fore deck and held a whisky jug
to the lips of his champion. This measure seemed to put new vigor into
him for about ten strokes. Then he stumbled and caught a crab, and the
race was over.

Abe pulled far enough ahead so that there should be no doubt about it,
then waited, resting on his oars.

He was panting hard, but his grin made him look anything but exhausted.
As Tad came forward, he mopped his forehead with his sleeve.

“Son,” said he, between breaths, “don’t ever let the other feller know
you’re as tired as he is. If he thinks you’re still fresh he’ll quit.”

After that they drifted for a while, and toward noon the big keel-boat
dropped down abreast of them again. The ruddy-bearded captain steered
close enough for conversation and grinned sociably as he spoke.

“Whar you from?” he asked.

Abe told him and came back with a similar question.

“We’re bringin’ a load o’ furs down from St. Louis,” answered
the keel-boat skipper. “Ol’ Man Carillon, he’s scairt to ship by
steamboat--’fraid they’ll blow up. So he still sends his furs this way.
More’n a thousand prime beaver skins we’ve got, an’ plenty of other
kinds besides. That’d be a haul worth even John Murrell’s time, eh?
I’ve got two extra men in the crew jest ’count o’ him an’ his gang.”

“They tell me he’s back,” said Abe.

“Sure thing,” replied the other. “He was layin’ low fer a couple o’
months, up river, but this last week he’s been seen ridin’ the roads
on that three-stockin’ boss o’ his--him an’ Bull Whaley an’ Sam Jukes.
That means thar’s some sort o’ devilment a-bilin’.”

“Well,” Abe answered, “jes’ so he stays on horseback an’ don’t come
meddlin’ with river folks, he’ll mebbe keep a whole skin.”

The keel-boat left them some distance astern while Abe was getting
dinner, but later in the day they sighted it again, and for the next
forty-eight hours the two craft were rarely more than a few miles apart.

Allen did not wake up until nearly dark, and even then he had little
stomach for the sizzling hog meat that Abe was frying. Next morning,
however, he was feeling like himself once more, and was even ready to
brag about his experiences ashore in Memphis, if Abe’s cutting sarcasm
had not quieted him.

They went down swiftly on the flood-water, twisting and turning
through new channels, and dashing through chutes where the river had
straightened its course and ran like a mill race. Occasionally they saw
the roofs of submerged cabins, and once or twice, when there seemed a
chance that people might be left in them, they stopped to see if they
could be of any help. In one house, floating with a gable end thrust up
at a crazy angle, they saw the body of a drowned woman caught by the
clothing to a window frame and trailing pitifully in the water. But
aside from that they found no human trace in all the desolate welter of
the river.

On the third day after leaving Memphis they passed the mouth of a great
river--the Arkansas--a raging tide that bore witness to heavy floods in
the back country.

For miles below, the surface of the Mississippi was littered with
gruesome débris. There were limbs of trees, parts of houses, bloated
bodies of farm animals. A huge flock of buzzards circled and settled,
on tilting black wings, and a stench of death filled the air.

Once, when Tad was perched high astern, swinging the steering-oar, he
caught sight of the carcass of a pig a little distance off. And even as
he watched, it was suddenly yanked under, leaving only a gurgling eddy
in the stream.

The St. Louis keel-boat was not far away, and her red-bearded captain
called across to Tad.

“Did ye see that?” he cried. “Big alligator done it. We’ll find lots of
’em below here.”

Sure enough, as they cast off next morning from the high bank topped
with cottonwoods where they had spent the night, a row of gnarled gray
logs below them came alive, turned with a swish of tails, and went
lumbering into the water.

“Don’t reckon we’ll be so keen to go swimmin’, from here down,” Abe
chuckled.

There were other signs that told them they had come into the real
South. Cotton plantations replaced the woods and squatters’ farms on
the higher ground. Broad, stout levees held the river in check for
miles along the steaming bottom lands. The weather was uncomfortably
hot, even in the scanty costumes which the boys wore. They kept out
of the sun as much as possible during the heat of the day, but their
faces, arms, and ankles were burned the color of an Indian’s. Abe, who
had been reading _Othello_, told Allen solemnly that he looked like the
Moor of Venice.

Three days after they passed the Arkansas mouth, they sighted
Vicksburg, a white town nestled in the crook of a bend, with water
above the top of the landings and washing over the lowest street.

Allen was ready for another adventure ashore, but Abe prevailed on him
to wait.

“Ye don’t figger the price o’ pork has gone up much since we left
Memphis, do ye?” said the lanky bow-oarsman scornfully. “After the
spectacle ye made o’ yerself up thar, I should think ye’d want to look
the other way if a town so much as came in sight.”

“That whisky must ha’ had pizen in it,” Allen muttered. But he had very
little more to say until they had left the landing astern.

“Oh, well,” he remarked at length, “we’ll be down to Natchez in another
day or two, an’ I reckon we’ll need some more provisions by then.
Natchez-under-the-Hill!” He pronounced the name of the town with a
certain relish. “The toughest landin’ on the whole river. I sure aim to
see the sights of that place.”

“The toughest sight you’ll see,” said Abe firmly, “will be the flat o’
my hand, unless you behave yourself mighty well from here down.”

The crest of the high water had passed, and the river was gradually
receding as they drifted southward. Along the bluffs on the Mississippi
side they watched a panorama of cotton plantations, half screened by
glossy-leaved magnolias in the gardens of the big white houses.

This was a rich country--a land of fabulous ease and prosperity, it
seemed to the two Hoosiers. Even Tad, who had seen plenty of wealth
in the Eastern cities, was amazed by the glimpses they got of the
luxurious planters’ life.

Once they passed a barge trimly painted in green and white, with
cushions and trailing silks over the stern. It was rowed by four
negroes, and its passengers were a lovely lady in a flowered bonnet, a
big, jolly, fair-haired man, and a little girl with golden curls.

The barge stopped at a private landing where a shining barouche with
two high-headed bay horses was waiting. Other horses, saddled and
held by negro grooms, stood near, and an elegantly dressed gentleman
and lady strolled down to the landing to greet the visitors. The crew
of the flatboat, drifting out of sight, caught a chime of fairy-like
laughter that followed them around the bend.

“Jiminy!” sighed Allen. “This is the section to live in, all right.
Niggers to wait on ye, an’ fine hosses, an’ summer all the year ’round!”

“I dunno,” said Abe, thoughtfully. “It’s grand fer the folks that owns
the niggers, but how about these poor whites, along the bottoms an’
back in the brush? They ain’t as well off as you an’ your Paw, by a
long shot. The South is fine, but it’s no country fer folks that ain’t
born rich.”

There were two more drowsy, uneventful days of drifting, and then
at dusk they came in sight of Natchez. It was the beginning of an
experience that Tad was never to forget as long as he lived.

There was a terrifying beauty over the river that night. A strange
green light had overspread the sky after sunset, and in it every
detail of the bank and the bluff stood out with unearthly clearness.
The air was sultry, with no hint of the breeze that usually ruffled
the water at evening. From a reedy place, shadowed by moss-draped live
oaks, a pair of great white egrets rose and winged silently away to the
northward.

They saw a church spire above the trees at the top of the bluff, and
then, low in the shadow along the waterside, the outlines of shacks and
houses, with a swarm of flatboats moored to the levee. A thin tinkle of
music reached their ears, and as they drew closer it resolved itself
into the squeak of fiddles and the throb of banjos.

They found a place to tie their craft, down at the lower end of the
line, near the steamboat landing, and hardly had they made the ropes
fast when a growl of thunder drowned out the music. A wind sprang up,
blowing from the south, and the sky grew dark with scudding clouds.

A sudden foreboding filled Tad. From that instant he had a dread of
Natchez-under-the-Hill.




CHAPTER XI


The storm struck hard, lashing the muddy water high along the levee and
tossing the broadhorns at their moorings. After the furious wind came
rain in a deluge that drenched the boys under their hastily erected
tarpaulins. And after the rain a pitch-black, sodden night.

A few lights glowed feebly in the town, and the music struck up again
after a while, but even Allen was too damp and dispirited to feel like
going ashore. They got a fire started on the wet hearth, and huddling
around it, finally went to sleep.

The sun was shining in the morning and all along the water front
a bustle of activity began. Boatmen clambered across the decks of
neighboring craft to buy or sell goods or visit acquaintances. There
was a constant noise of laughing, shouting, swearing, and fighting.

The fiddles began their monotonous squeaking once more in the levee
saloons, and Allen began to cast a restless eye shoreward, but Abe
found plenty for them all to do aboard the _Katy Roby_. They cooked and
ate breakfast, swabbed the decks, and spread out their bedding to dry
in the sun. They watched a big, new steamboat, the _Tecumseh_, swing in
to the landing, her bow a bare thirty feet from them when she made her
mooring.

“That’s the fastest boat on the river,” they heard a near-by
ark-captain say. “She’s got new-fangled boilers with more steam
pressure on ’em than the _Amazon_, even. An’ they say her cap’n is out
to break all records to Louisville this trip.”

From the speed with which her darky deck hands rolled molasses
hogsheads aboard, it could be seen that some of the excitement of her
race up river had got into their blood.

A group of fastidiously dressed passengers, thronging her upper decks,
looked down with laughing interest at the scene on the landing. The men
were holding watches and laying wagers on the time of the steamer’s
departure. In less than half an hour the last huge barrel was in place
on the forward cargo deck and the mate cried his “All aboard,” as the
negroes ran the gangplank in. With a clang of bells the big boat’s
paddles churned the water and she backed out, wheeling into the current.

Tad, looking up a little wistfully at her gleaming brass and freshly
painted upper works, watched her whole magnificent length sweep by.
And then suddenly he gripped the gunwale of the flatboat and stared
open-mouthed. For high up on the hurricane deck, astern, he had seen a
solitary figure--a big middle-aged man with a beaver hat and a familiar
set to the shoulders. The man was just turning to leave the rail and he
was unable to get a good view of his face, but he was almost sure....
“Dad!” he screamed, with all the voice he could muster, “Dad!”

There had been a feather of white steam up aloft on the _Tecumseh’s_
funnel when he started to shout, and as he launched his cry a deafening
blast of the whistle came, drowning him out.

Another long-drawn hoot and two short ones followed. Before they were
finished, the steamboat was a hundred yards away, and the man who
looked like Tad’s father had vanished down the companionway. The boy
had a great lump in his throat as he turned away. He stumbled aft and
sat down beside Poke, blinking his eyes fast to keep back the unmanly
tears.

Abe had heard him shout and now came over to stand behind him, dropping
a big hand casually on his shoulder.

“Reckon that was your father?” he asked.

Tad nodded. “I couldn’t be sure,” he answered, “but it looked a lot
like him.”

“Wal,” said Abe, “I know how ye feel, right enough, but don’t take it
too hard. He’ll be back in New Orleans to meet ye. Didn’t ye tell him
in yer letter that we’d be thar next week?”

“Sure,” Tad replied. “Only he must be pretty worried, or he wouldn’t be
on his way up to try to find me, now.”

Allen had been up on the levee, watching the _Tecumseh’s_ departure and
chatting with a crowd of flatboat men. Now he returned with the look of
one bearing news.

“Hey, Tad,” he called as he jumped aboard, “what was the name o’ that
boat that was expected in Shawneetown--the one the postmaster said he’d
mail yer letter by?”

“The _Nancy Jones_,” said Tad.

“That’s what I thought,” Allen nodded. “Wal, they tol’ me up on the
bank jest now that the _Nancy Jones_ was blowed up two weeks ago in
Vicksburg bend, an’ lost with more’n half her passengers an’ crew.”

Tad’s jaw dropped. “Then--then Dad doesn’t even know I’m alive,” he
stammered. “No wonder he’s on his way up the river.”

In a few words Abe told Allen of Tad’s momentary glimpse of the man
on the steamer. “Now the thing fer you to do,” said he, turning to the
boy, “is to send another letter post-haste to New Orleans, so the folks
thar kin reach him whar he’s gone.”

“I’m goin’ ashore,” Allen volunteered. “He kin come along an’ fix up to
send his letter whiles I transact some business.”

Abe looked doubtful. “All right,” he agreed finally. But to Tad, as
they prepared to leave the boat, he whispered, “Keep an eye on him now,
an’ don’t let him go in any places he shouldn’t.”

They clambered to the levee top and walked through the thick black
mud up the main street of the lower town. It was nearly noon, and
Natchez was waking up for the day’s work. Patrons by ones and twos were
entering the various barrooms they passed. Gambling joints were rolling
up shutters and dusting off tables. A few women, hard-faced and heavily
painted, leered at them from doorways, and the dance-hall music droned
on unceasingly.

A negro teamster directed them to the post office on a side street a
few blocks from the river.

“Here you are,” said Allen as they reached the entrance, and Tad would
have gone in at once if his eye had not been caught by a notice posted
in the dusty window. With growing excitement he stood before it,
staring at the boldly-printed words. What he read was this:

            To Whom it May Concern

                      A
              _REWARD OF $5,000_

           (Five thousand Dollars)
               will be paid for
               _Information_

  leading to the recovery of my son, Thaddeus
  Hopkins, if alive, or of his body if dead.

  This boy is 15 years old, of medium height
  and weight for his age, with light brown hair,
  blue eyes, and a ruddy complexion.

                _DISAPPEARED_

  from his cabin on the Steamboat _Ohio Belle_,
  somewhere between Owensboro, Kentucky,
  and the mouth of the Wabash River, on the
  night of April 8th, 1828.

  Any one having news of his whereabouts
  should communicate immediately with

                 JEREMIAH HOPKINS,
                   26 St. Louis Street,
                     New Orleans, Louisiana.

“Allen!” Tad gasped. “Look at this!”

There was no answer. Swinging about in surprise, he found the street
behind him empty. Only a lean yellow dog scratched for fleas in the
middle of the dusty road.

Tad stared up and down the straggling rows of houses, bewildered at his
companion’s disappearance. Then his eye lit on two saloons across the
way, and he knew at once where Allen had gone.

With Abe’s parting injunction still fresh in his mind, he darted to
the other side of the street and stood a moment in hesitation before
the two doors. There was no way to tell which place Allen had entered
except to go in himself and find out. He decided to try the right-hand
building first.

The swinging half-door gave easily under his hand, and he stepped into
a square, half-darkened room, with stained wooden tables and a long
mahogany bar. There was no one in sight, and Tad hesitated a moment in
the middle of the sanded floor, looking about him, disappointed. Then
he caught the sound of voices and low laughter and saw that the door
leading into the rear room stood slightly ajar. He fancied that it was
Allen he heard, laughing over having given him the slip. Quickly he
crossed the floor, pushed open the door, and walked through.

A glance showed him that there were only three men in the room, and
that Allen was not one of them. At the right of the table was a broad,
thick-necked, powerfully-built man with a tight stock and a red,
angry-looking face. Next him sat a thin, sallow, rat-eyed fellow with a
nervous affection that twitched one corner of his mouth downward into
a sneer every second or two. The third member of the party slouched in
his chair, a long, slim figure with a dark mustache, the upper part of
his face shaded by the broad brim of his hat.

Each of the three had started slightly at the lad’s abrupt entrance,
and they now sat watching him with hostile eyes.

“I--I beg your pardon,” said Tad. “I thought a friend of mine came in
here.” And he started to back out.

Suddenly the tall man with the black mustache was on his feet.

“Wait!” he ordered in a husky voice that struck terror to Tad’s heart.
“Stay where yo’ are, suh.”

But waiting was the last thing in the boy’s mind. He had caught a
glimpse of the man’s face and his long, slim hands. It was the Wheeling
gambler who had thrown him overboard from the _Ohio Belle_. With a
sense of panic he turned and darted for the door, but he never reached
it. A stool came whirling through the air and struck him in the back of
the head, and down he went, his mind blanked out in a roaring gulf of
darkness.




CHAPTER XII


The next thing Tad knew was a sensation of intense physical discomfort.
His head throbbed fiercely, his wrists were chafed, and he lay, in a
very painful position, face down, across the saddle-bow of a galloping
horse. When his senses had cleared enough for him to remember what had
happened, he tried to figure out where these desperadoes were taking
him. But all that he could see, facing the ground, was the packed brown
earth of the roadside and the flashing green of undergrowth beyond. He
had a vague recollection of having been carried up a long, steep hill;
so he supposed they must have climbed one of the roads that ran up
along the bluff.

One other thing he noticed, and that seemed to increase the hazards
of a situation which surely was already serious enough. As he swung,
head down, he could watch the rhythmic movement of the horse’s legs.
Both forelegs white up to the knee--one hind leg white above the hock;
three white “stockings.” Where had he heard, in the last few days, of a
“three-stocking” horse?

Then he remembered, and it came over him with a sickening feeling that
his life was worth very little, indeed. For the black-haired man who
had once before tried to kill him and who now had him prisoner could be
none other than the terrible John Murrell himself.

There were two other horses, one behind them and one ahead.
Occasionally one of the riders would speak in a guarded voice, but for
the most part they rode hard and in silence.

It might have been only half an hour that they traveled, after Tad
regained consciousness. If so, it was the longest thirty minutes he had
ever spent in his life.

At last, when it seemed as if he must cry out with pain if he were
jolted any farther, his captor pulled the big horse, lathered and
champing, to a stop.

Without ceremony he caught Tad by his shoulder and dropped him in a
heap on the ground. The boy was helpless, his ankles and his wrists
bound tightly. But his brain was still working, and after the first
moment of relief he began looking around, to see, if possible, where he
was.

Dense brush and tall trees flanked the narrow, grassy track on both
sides, and there was no view that would show him how far they had come
from the river.

The riders had stopped in front of a house that stood at the left of
the road--a high, bleak frame building, with no trees in front to
soften its harsh outline. The shutterless windows leered down like evil
eyes on the unkempt, desolate dooryard. An unnatural silence hung about
the premises. There was no singing of birds, and in the flat gray light
of a cloudy noonday, the whole atmosphere of the place seemed lonely
and sinister beyond compare.

The riders dismounted and talked together for a moment.

“Here,” said the tall leader at length, “we can settle all that
presently. You ride back down the road, Sam, and you, Bull, keep watch
up the other way till I get him out of sight.”

Tad heard the names with a shudder. He had guessed right, then. Bull
Whaley and Sam Jukes were the chief lieutenants of the famous outlaw.
He had heard of them and their cruelty from the keel-boat hands on the
river.

Murrell stood looking down at him for a moment, an ironical smile
twisting his pale face.

“I see you recall our havin’ met before, suh,” he said with his polite
Southern drawl. “That’s as it should be, fo’ you are goin’ to be my
guest fo’ a while. We’ll see, now, if there are any quarters ready to
receive you.”

He put two fingers between his lips and gave a singularly piercing
whistle, so shrill that it hurt Tad’s eardrums. In a few seconds the
house door opened, and a gigantic negro, in the rough clothes of a
field hand, ran down the steps.

Murrell looked from Tad to the huge negro and back at Tad again. He
seemed to relish the situation. “This,” he explained to the boy, “is
Congo, my bodyguard. He was the son of a great African chief, and when
they brought him off the slave ship he killed four men. They tortured
him so that he will never hear or speak again. But I rode by at the
right moment and saved him from death. At a sign from me he would pick
you up now and tear you into forty pieces.”

The giant black seemed to sense what his master was saying, for he
flexed his mighty fingers, and his sides shook with a great, silent
laugh. Tad, looking into that cavernous mouth, saw that there was no
tongue back of the gleaming white teeth, and the negro’s ears had been
cropped and mutilated in horrible fashion.

Murrell gestured toward the house and led the way to the steps, and
Congo picked the boy up as easily as if he had been a baby. Through the
doorway and along a narrow hall he carried him, and then at another
signal from Murrell, he climbed with him up a flight of steep, rickety
stairs. Opening a door at the top, he flung his burden down, and stood
awaiting the further commands of his master.

Murrell nodded. When the negro had gone out, he stooped and dragged
Tad a few feet into a shadowy corner. Here he picked up a heavy iron
fetter attached to a three-foot chain, and clasped it around one of the
boy’s ankles. With a brass key taken from his pocket, he secured its
ponderous lock.

“That and our hospitality,” he chuckled, “ought to be plenty to keep
you here. I’ll let you have the use o’ yo’ hands to keep the fleas
from bein’ too familiar.” So saying, he whipped out a clasp knife and
cut the cords that had bound Tad’s wrists and ankles. And with an
exaggerated bow he went out, closing the door after him.

When the sound of his footsteps had died away at the bottom of the
stairs, Tad raised himself to a sitting posture and looked about at
his prison. In what he saw there was nothing to lighten the gloom of
his desperate situation. The room was a long, narrow garret, lighted
only by one window, at the farther end. Yellow, mildewed plaster was
dropping off the walls in flakes. The floor was a mass of filth. Around
him in the corner where he sat were dirt and grease and foul-smelling
rags, and the whole place had a close, sickly odor that nauseated him.

But Tad was not one to give up easily. He had a stubborn sort of
courage that rose to occasions of this kind. And when he had conquered
his first feeling of illness, he set himself to test every possible
avenue of escape.

The chain attached to his ankle-iron was heavy and strong--a
trace-chain from a wagon, he judged. At the other end it was fastened
to a huge iron staple, driven solidly into one of the timbers of the
floor. A tug or two convinced him of the utter futility of trying to
pull it out. The fetter, he was quite certain now, had been designed
to hold big, powerful men--the stolen slaves who were said to be the
special prey of Murrell and his outlaw gang.

When he felt of the leg-iron itself, it seemed large and loose about
his ankle, though much too small to allow his heel to pass through. His
fingers moved over the surface of the fetter and paused suddenly in a
deep, rough notch at the back, near the hinge. With trembling hands he
turned it as far as he could and peered down at it through the dim
half-dusk. At some time or other the iron had been partly cut through
by a file.

Tad’s pulses leaped as he made this discovery. For a moment he thought
he might finish what had been so well begun by some earlier prisoner.
But as he searched about the floor in his corner he realized that there
was nothing in sight that could possibly be used as an abrasive.

The afternoon dragged by with sickening slowness. The heat of the
garret nearly suffocated him, and there was nothing to do but fight the
flies and wait--for what, he did not know.

An intermittent drone of voices could be heard in the room downstairs.
Gradually they grew louder--as the bottle was passed, Tad supposed--and
he could even catch occasional words. Perhaps he would be able to
overhear some of their plans. Crawling as far as the chain would
permit, he stretched full length on his stomach, and laid an ear to
the floor. As he did so, one of the boards moved a trifle under his
hand. He touched it again and found it loose. By working his finger
nails into the crack at one end he was able to lift it. The board was a
short one that had been put in as a filler between two longer pieces.
When Tad put his head down over the hole there were only thin lath and
plaster between him and the room below.

Lying still and listening, he could now catch quite distinctly the
louder parts of the conversation. There was a deep, angry voice which
he recognized as that of Bull Whaley, and a thin whine that he thought
must come from Sam Jukes. Murrell himself seemed to be saying very
little.

“But five thousand dollars, man--why, that’s the price of four or five
good cotton niggers!” Whaley was roaring. “Don’t the notice say ‘dead
or alive’? He’s supposed to ha’ been drowned, ain’t he? Well,” he
finished triumphantly, “we kin fix that part of it easy enough.”

“That’s too risky,” Jukes answered. “They’d be pretty sure to look
into it if he was brought in dead. What I say is, let him be rescued
by one of our New Orleans men. The boy won’t ever suspect, an’ his old
man will be so thankful that he was delivered out o’ the hands of the
ruffians--meanin’ you, Bull--that he’ll pay the five thousand without a
whimper. Let’s see, now, LeGrand would be the chap to put it through.
He’s a good Creole an’ stands well with the police.”

“Huh!” Whaley grunted. “An’ what’d LeGrand want for the job? Half the
reward, if I know him. No, sir, take him in dead, I says. There’s more
in it fer us that way.”

Then Tad heard the husky drawl of the chief.

“Neither one of yo’ ideas is wu’th the powder to blow it up,
gentlemen,” he said. “You’re used to makin’ small plans an’ takin’
small pickin’s. Five thousand dollars is all either of you can see in
this. I aim to get fifty thousand.”

His words evidently left his hearers dumfounded. For a moment there was
no sound. Then--“_Fifty_ thousand!” both exclaimed together.

“That was what I said,” Murrell returned. “This man Hopkins has offered
a reward of five thousand. That means he is rich. He could scrape up,
on his credit, all of fifty thousand dollars, and that is the sum I
shall ask him to pay fo’ the safe return of his son.”

“Hold him fer ransom, eh?” said Whaley with a chuckle. “You win, Jack.
I reckon if you sign the letter, they’ll know they’ve got to pay or
they’ll never see him again.”

“Yes, that’s the plan, right enough,” Jukes put in. “We’ll have to fix
up a good place for ’em to bring the money, though, so we can watch out
for tricks.”

“As to that,” said Murrell, “I’ve worked out all the details. You know
that island--” And here he dropped his voice too low for Tad’s ears.
The rest of the conversation was evidently held in an undertone, heads
close together over the table, for try as he would, the boy could
catch only a stray word now and then.

The sun had evidently broken through the clouds, for a slanting beam
came through the cob-webs of the room’s one window, which opened toward
the west. And this feeble ray of light chanced to fall just inside
the edge of the opening in the floor. It was a lucky chance for Tad.
Glancing into the hole as he was about to crawl away, he saw something
that made his heart jump into his throat. Quickly he reached down and
brought it up into the light--a big, three-edged file.

The hole in the floor must have been the secret hiding-place used by
that other prisoner, who had been taken away before his work on the
fetter was finished.

Eagerly Tad felt the edges of the file. It was still sharp. He was just
moving to a position where he could get at his ankle-iron when a step
sounded on the stairs, and he had barely time to replace the tool in
the aperture and cover it with the board. As he crawled back to his
rags in the corner the door was opened and the giant slave, Congo, came
in.

The negro set down a plate on which were some thick slices of buttered
bread and a tin cup full of coffee. Tad waited for him to go, but he
pointed down at the food and evidently expected to stay until it was
finished. The boy had very little appetite, in spite of having tasted
nothing since breakfast. He did manage, however, to eat two pieces of
bread and gulp down the strong black coffee. Then an idea came to him.
He had been wondering how he was to file his leg-iron without making
too great a noise. If he could save the butter on the remaining piece
of bread he might use it as a lubricant.

Picking up the slice he pretended to take a mouthful, meanwhile pushing
the plate and cup toward Congo. The giant black stooped, picked them
up, and stood for a moment grinning that terrible grin of his. Then
he drew a forefinger slowly across his throat and rolled up his eyes
till only the whites showed, in a ghastly pantomime of death. With this
little token of farewell, he slipped through the door and bolted it on
the outside.

Tad wasted no time in worrying over the meaning of the negro’s signs.
As soon as the footsteps had reached the bottom of the stairs he crept
to his loose board and took the file from its hiding-place. In the
fading twilight he could barely see the notch in the fetter, but it was
easy to find by touch, and he soon turned it into a position where he
could move the file back and forth comfortably. By rubbing a little
butter along the cutting edge, he found that the noise was scarcely
audible--certainly too slight to be heard on the first floor.

For the best part of an hour he worked, stealthily but with hardly a
moment’s rest. He could feel the notch in the iron growing deeper. It
must be two-thirds of the way through, he thought. And then catastrophe
overtook him. He was just reaching for the piece of bread, to get more
butter, when suddenly it was snatched from under his hand. The biggest
rat he had ever seen had seized it and scurried away across the floor.

Tad was more than startled. For a moment his nerves were shaken, and he
sat there trembling with weariness and fright. Then the ridiculous side
of the situation struck him and he rocked back and forth with smothered
laughter. When the spasm was over he tried to work on the fetter again
and found that the scraping of the dry file was becoming more and more
noisy. Saliva would quiet it for a stroke or two, but it dried too
quickly. At last he gave up the effort. He put the file away, dropped
the board back in place and curled up exhausted in his corner, wishing
desperately for his snug blanket aboard the _Katy Roby_.




CHAPTER XIII


There may have been worse nights in history than the one Tad spent in
that garret, but in all his experience he never was to know a longer or
more nerve-racking one.

Rats scampered everywhere, in the walls and up and down the floor. He
could hear them gnawing, squealing, fighting all about him.

Once or twice, when he drowsed off for a moment, their furry bodies
brushed against his skin, waking him with a start. He had heard of rats
attacking men in places like this. What if one of them should bite him
there in the dark? He sat, tense and waiting, for hours on end, and
shook his chain and thumped his hands on the floor to keep them away.

The lesser vermin in the rags about him were not so easily frightened
off. He had discovered, almost as soon as he was put in the room, that
Murrell’s mention of fleas was more than idle chatter. Now, under cover
of the darkness, they came in swarms to feast upon him. In a way,
perhaps, they were a blessing, for they gave him little time to dwell
on his graver troubles.

Nevertheless he was haunted all night by the thought of Abe’s distress.
What had the big flatboatman thought of him when he failed to return
at noon? Allen, doubtless, had stayed ashore drinking and enjoying
himself, and Abe must have felt that Tad had betrayed his trust. At
least so the boy pictured it to himself. Then he realized that the
long-shanked Hoosier would be far more concerned with finding him than
with blaming him. Just what would Abe do, he wondered. For he was
positive that he would do something. Murrell and all his gang went
armed to the teeth. If Abe should run afoul of some of them he would
almost certainly be killed. Tad thought of the strong, homely, kindly
face of his big friend and came near sobbing.

At last, toward dawn, he was too weary to fight the fleas, and hardly
cared whether the rats bit him or not. Tumbled in a heap on the floor,
he slept the sleep of sheer exhaustion.

The reflected light of a bright morning sun was in the room when he
awoke. A clatter of pots and pans and an odor of cooking came up from
below. Presently he heard boots thumping and the scrape of chairs and
knew that the outlaws were sitting down to breakfast.

Rubbing his eyes, he looked about the dirty room and saw that there
was a little heap of iron filings on the floor where he had worked.
Hastily he lifted the loose board and swept the tell-tale gray dust
into the hole. He was none too soon, for a moment later he heard the
pad of bare feet outside, and the sliding of the bolt on his door.
Congo entered bearing his breakfast.

The meal this time was an unappetizing kind of cornmeal mush without
milk. Tad had hoped to get some more butter. He hid his disappointment,
however, and ate as much of the stuff as he could, knowing that he
would need all his strength if he was ever to escape. There was also a
cup of water which he drank eagerly.

When he had finished, Congo took the bowl and cup and paused in the
doorway as before to grimace at him. This time the huge negro changed
his gesture. With one hand he made the sign of a noose about his neck,
winding up behind his left ear with a horrible jerk of the head and
more silent laughter.

Tad, with a sick feeling at the pit of his stomach, wondered what other
varieties of sudden death he would see illustrated before he left that
filthy place.

The morning was well along--it must have been after ten o’clock, Tad
thought--when there was a sound of heavy hoofs galloping up the road,
and several riders dismounted in the yard. The boy could hear them
swearing at the horses and then greeting Murrell and his companions as
they approached the door.

These newcomers seemed to be members of the outlaw gang, for they spoke
freely of Tad’s capture and asked the chief what he planned to do with
his prize. As they came into the room below, one of them was roaring
with laughter. Tad took up the board in order to hear better and found
he could make out nearly everything that was said.

“But the blankety-blankedest thing I ever saw, suh,” one of the new
men was remarking, “was this big Hoosier broadhorn steerer comin’
up the Main Street. Seven foot if he was an inch--yes, suh, I’m not
exaggeratin’ a particle--seven foot tall! He marches up to the first
saloon he sees and asks the bar-keep if he knows anything about a boy
that’s missin’. The man gives him some sort of a sassy answer, and next
thing he knows this long-legged river hand has grabbed him by the neck
and flung him out in the middle of the road.

“Fight? No, there was no fight. The Hoosier just goes along and leaves
him there. At the next place the same thing happens, only the bartender
saves his skin by apologizin’ mighty quick when he sees that long arm
comin’. So it goes all the way up the street.

“Finally he gets to Nolan’s place. By this time there’s quite a crowd
of flatboat and keel-boat men followin’ along to see the fun. An’
drinkin’ at Nolan’s bar is some ark hand that pipes up and says yes,
indeed, he saw the boy. He was bein’ carried off by three men on
horseback, ridin’ hell-for-leather up the South Bluff road.

“‘What did they look like?’ asks Longshanks, and the fellow tells him
that the one holdin’ the boy was tall and rode a big sorrel horse with
three white stockin’s.

“At that, half the river-men in the crowd shout ‘Jack Murrell,’ and
there’s a grand howdy-do. The big Hoosier tries to find out where you’d
be likely to take the boy, but of course no one knows a thing.

“I understand he’s gone up to Natchez-on-the-Hill this mornin’, to try
to raise a posse.”

Tad heard Murrell’s lazy laugh. “Huh,” said the leader, “he won’t get
far there. What say, Carson, want to have a look at the youngster?”

There was a sound of boots that warned Tad to put the board back in
position. He crawled back into the corner where the shadows were
deepest and turned the filed place in the fetter carefully under his
ankle.

When the door opened he sat there sullen-faced, picking at the ragged
edges of his shirt sleeve with listless fingers.

Murrell was accompanied by a big, florid young man in the dapper dress
of a planter, who slapped the dust from his boots with a riding-whip as
he stared down at the boy.

“Haw, haw! Fifty thousand--for that?” he laughed. “Here, step up, boy,
and let’s have a look at you!” And he flicked the stinging lash of his
whip into the lad’s neck. A sudden flush spread over Tad’s face, but
he sat perfectly still. Angrily, Carson threw up his arm for a full
stroke, but Murrell detained him with a sharp word.

“Careful,” he said. “He’s mine, you know.” For a moment Carson faced
the cold gleam of the chief’s eyes. Then his own eyes dropped. He gave
an uneasy laugh and turned toward the stairs, and after another glance
at Tad, Murrell followed him.

The time dragged by interminably. Buzzing flies made the daylight
hours seem as unbearably long as the night had been. Sometime in the
afternoon the boy dozed off and was finally awakened by the arrival of
his supper. To his joy there was bread and butter. He was so hungry
that there was a real temptation to gobble all of it, but he saved the
last piece, pretending to eat it, as before.

Just as Congo stooped to pick up the plate, there came that
ear-splitting whistle that Tad had heard once before, and the big negro
leaped as if he had been shot. Without even a backward look he slipped
through the door, fastened it, and hurried down the stairs.

Other horsemen had arrived, it seemed. Tad heard strange voices below,
and after removing the board caught Murrell’s answer.

“If they do come, it will be in daylight,” he was saying. “We’ll have
to run him back to a safer place in the morning, and lie low for a few
days.”

The boy’s heart sank. Tonight, it seemed, was his last chance. If he
did not get away before morning he was to be taken off to some new
stronghold where there would be even less hope of escape.

Quickly he took the file out of the hole and set to work. Before
darkness had completely fallen he could see that another hour’s labor
would sever the broad iron ring. He rested a few minutes and then
went on, pushing the file steadily back and forth. This time he took
no chances with his bread and butter, but kept it tucked away in the
bosom of his shirt.

From the noise in the room below he judged that there must be five or
six men at least gathered about the table. They seemed to be playing
cards and drinking, for he heard frequent orders for rum punch shouted
at a servant they called Juba.

What game they were playing he could not tell, but the stakes must have
been high. A loud voice, made thick by many potations, reached the boy
distinctly through the garret floor,

“You goin’ to stick along, Murrell?” the voice was saying. “You goin’
to stick? Gettin’ in pretty deep, ain’t you? That’s fifteen hundred
you owe me now. All right, I’m raisin’ it two hundred more. What d’ye
say--want to put the boy up? Eh? That gilt-edged prisoner o’ yours? I
aim to back these cards all night; so you better unlimber some cash or
else put up the boy.”

Tad bent harder to his work, and the sweat streamed from his face as he
filed. If they were making him a stake in their game and the cards went
against Murrell, his new owner might come up at any moment to claim
him. The file was almost through. He gave it a last stroke or two, and
the fetter fell open with a sudden clank of metal.

Holding his breath, the boy waited to see if they had heard, but it
appeared that all in the lower room were too absorbed in what was going
on there to notice any such trifling sound. With all possible care
he lifted his ankle out of the broken clasp and stood up, feeling an
exhilarating sense of freedom.

Cautiously, in the darkness, he moved across the room. The door was
secured on the outside, as he had expected. He left it and turned
toward the window, treading very softly and testing each board with his
bare toes.

There had been a momentary lull in the voices downstairs. Now, with
startling suddenness, some one ripped out an angry oath, and there was
a commotion of chairs being pushed back. Two pistol shots rent the air,
close together, and then all was quiet again except for a single low
groan.

Tad stood still, trying to control the shaking of his knees.

“He’s dead,” came the heavy voice of Bull Whaley. “Well, we can’t leave
him here. Come, give me a hand, some one.”

The house door opened and closed again, and then there was a short,
ugly laugh, followed by a call for Juba and another round of drinks.
Tad tiptoed forward to the window.

Where he had feared to find a complicated system of fastenings, there
was only a big square nail driven part way into the frame above the
lower sash. It was solidly imbedded in the wood, but by moving it up
and down until it had a trifle of play, he was able at last to pull it
out with his fingers.

To the boy’s relief, the sash was loose enough to raise without too
much effort. He lifted it an inch at a time, easing it past the
squeaks, and braced it open with a two-foot length of stick which had
been lying on the sill.

A young moon, partly obscured by clouds, shed a faint light over the
dooryard. Tad could see the ground, fifteen feet below, with a tangled
mass of rank weeds growing against the house. A score of yards beyond
was the road, and then woods, black and dense, stretching away to the
west. A little night breeze came in the window with refreshing coolness.

Tad stood there for a while, wondering what time of night it was and
how late it would be before the outlaws went to sleep. He was afraid
they might stay a long time over their liquor. Climbing down past the
window of the room in which they sat seemed a foolhardy plan, but Tad
grew restless at the thought of a long wait.

At last he decided to go back to his hole in the floor and listen to
their talk. Treading lightly but swiftly, he retraced his steps. The
garret was as dark as pitch, but he believed he knew his way. He must
be nearing the place now. And even as this thought crossed his mind he
stepped directly into the opening. There was a crackle of breaking lath
and a crash of plaster, and Tad’s foot went through the ceiling of the
room beneath. He withdrew it instantly and stood there trembling, his
heart pounding with terror and with fury at his own clumsiness.

A sound of startled swearing came from below, and through the aperture
he caught a glimpse of flushed faces staring upward. For a long moment
they stood so. Then the faces disappeared and there was a rush of feet
through the hallway leading to the stairs.

Only one course lay open for Tad, and he took it. Darting across the
garret, he scrambled through the window and let himself down, his hands
gripping the sill, till his feet touched the ledge above the ground
floor window. Would they see him? He had no way of telling how many had
stayed in the room below. But he could already hear shouts at the top
of the stairs, and some one was fumbling at the bolt.

With a deep intake of breath the boy let go one hand, swung outward and
jumped.




CHAPTER XIV


The ten-foot drop to the ground jarred Tad from head to toe but did
not really hurt him. He was up in an instant, and without even a
backward glance at the house he made for the trees across the road. As
he started to run he tripped over something bulky in the grass and saw
with a shudder that it was the body of the man called Carson, still and
cold, a ray of moonlight falling on his white, upturned face. Tad sped
onward, cleared the road in a long leap, in order to leave no track
in the dust, and plunged into the brush on the farther side. The dark
wall of leaves closed behind him, and he knew that for the moment at
least he was beyond the outlaws’ reach, but he did not slacken speed.
Tumbling over fallen logs, diving headforemost through thickets,
dashing forward wherever an opening showed between the tree trunks, he
kept on. Weak as he was from scanty food and lack of sleep, he must
have traveled a good half mile through the woods before he fell, too
exhausted to pick himself up.

For a long time he lay there, panting, till the vast ache inside his
ribs grew less painful and finally departed. Then at last he rose on
wobbly legs and went forward. When he was a prisoner in the outlaws’
garret he had made no definite plans beyond escaping from the house.
But now he saw quite clearly that some sort of intelligent planning
would be necessary if he wanted to avoid getting lost or recaptured.

To reach the river was his first problem. If he could strike the bank
he was sure he could find Natchez, somewhere a few miles to the north.
So he went on, searching for a more open space where he might get his
bearings.

For what seemed like an age he plowed through dense timber, where
he could see only an occasional gleam of moonlight, much less a
recognizable star. But finally the trees opened out in front of him and
he found himself in the edge of a small clearing, full of stumps and
brush, but giving a clear view overhead. A few clouds still covered
part of the sky, but he made out the Dipper, and following the two
pointers, located the North Star. It was ahead of him and a little to
the right, so that he knew his general direction had been good. What he
wanted now was to bear toward the left, shaping a westerly course, and
so reach the river bluffs.

At the farther side of the clearing he struck into what seemed to be
a wood path leading westward. Rough as it was, he found he could walk
along it with much less difficulty than through the trackless brush,
and as long as it continued fairly straight he had no fear of losing
his direction.

For more than a mile he followed this trail, and came at length to a
narrow little valley where the path led off to the right along the
brink of the ravine. As he paused, undecided, a faint sound of water
came to him from somewhere below in the undergrowth. He had been
desperately thirsty for hours. In a moment he had scrambled down the
bank and was bending above a shallow little stream. Down he went on
hands and knees and drank his fill of the clear, cold water. And then,
just as he was getting to his feet, there came a sound that fairly
froze his heart with fear. Still far off, it was, but unmistakable--the
deep, bell-like baying of a hound.

Until that moment Tad had not thought of dogs. Yet it was natural
enough that Murrell should have them. In his trade of slave-stealing,
he must often find use for bloodhounds.

The muffled note rang out again. Was it nearer this time? On his
trail--_his_ trail! They were after him with dogs! For an instant Tad
felt the panic terror that makes the hunted rabbit run in circles. His
only impulse was to rush off blindly, somewhere--anywhere.

Then some measure of sense returned to him and he began thinking,
swiftly. Up to that point the scent would be fresh and strong, easily
followed. His pursuers would make far better time than he had made,
thrashing through the brush. From now on he must baffle them, or he was
lost.

The stream was hardly more than a rivulet, a few feet wide, but it
offered him his only chance to cover his scent. Plunging in, he found
it less than knee-deep, with a fairly smooth, sandy bottom. He followed
it downstream, wading fast, and keeping an eye on the direction it was
taking, when the leaves overhead permitted a view of the stars.

Once or twice he had to climb out to get around fallen trees, and this
gave him an idea. Wherever there was a likely opening on either bank,
leading away from the stream, he left the water, ran a few steps into
the woods and returned, as nearly as possible in the same tracks. Then
he waded on with all the speed he could muster.

Occasionally the wind bore to him the cry of the hound, sometimes
clearer, sometimes fainter, but always a sound that chilled his blood.

Tad had long since passed the winded stage. He went on steadily, his
breathing a succession of gasps that no longer seemed to hurt, a
deadness in his legs and a queer ringing in his ears. He had no idea
how long he had been running so, when suddenly the brook deepened and
his numbed senses were shocked wide awake by a plunge into cold water.

He realized, as he floundered up again, that the sky overhead was open.
He was standing up to his neck in a broad marshy pool that stretched
away to left and right for a long distance. Under the ghostly moon it
lay dark and mysterious, wholly silent except for the muffled plash of
a heron hunting frogs. Like every boy, Tad had a horror of swimming in
strange water at night. He stood there, shivering, trying to make up
his mind. The opposite bank was not so far away, but sluggish ponds ...
water moccasins....

The bay of the bloodhound came to him again, unexpectedly close this
time. He waited no longer but threw himself forward, swimming with
all his might. The pool was only thirty or forty yards across at this
place, and in a few strokes he was halfway over. Then a vicious cramp
caught at the big muscles in the back of his thigh--twisting him with
pain till he almost went under. He managed to straighten the leg and
struggled on, kicking only with the other, till he felt ooze under his
toes, and crawled out somehow through slimy reeds and lily-pads to the
soft black earth of the bank.

There for a while he lay, his exhaustion so complete that he scarcely
cared what happened. Both his legs were cruelly knotted with cramps,
and his whole body ached with weariness. Rest he must have if he were
ever to reach the river. He crept a little farther into the reeds
and lay on his back, staring up at the stars and listening to the
intermittent baying of the hound.

At last the cramps left him and he thought he had recovered his wind
sufficiently to go on. But just as he was rising to his knees there
came a thrashing in the underbrush near the mouth of the brook and he
heard men’s voices. A light breeze was blowing across the pond from
them to him so that he caught some of the words plainly.

“What’s the matter with ol’ Red-eye--lost the scent again?” came Bull
Whaley’s panting bass. And as if in answer the bloodhound spoke--a
full-throated, menacing challenge that fairly lifted the hair on Tad’s
head. Through the screening reeds he could see the beast on the other
side of the pool, gray and gigantic in the moonlight, its long ears
trailing the ground as it nosed here and there along the bank.

[Illustration: HE COULD SEE THE BEAST ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THE POOL]

Behind, in the shadow, was the broad, squat figure of Whaley, and
another man whom Tad did not recognize was holding the hound’s leash.

A stream of profanity came from this second man. “Lost him!” he
growled. “Must have swum across. What d’ye say--want to send the dog
over?”

“No use,” returned the other. “The boy’s most likely a long ways off
by now. An’ even if Red-eye got over without bein’ bit by a snake, I
wouldn’t foller him. The nearest place to cross is Cordle’s Bridge, a
mile away. What I say is we’d best git back to the horses an’ make it
down to the river road in a hurry. We’d ought to head him off there,
sure.”

They stood there arguing for a while, then turned back into the woods,
dragging the huge, unwilling hound. And Tad, feeling that he had at
least a momentary respite from pursuit, started toward the setting moon
once more.

The rest had helped both his legs and his courage. Now that he knew how
the outlaws expected to capture him, he believed he had a chance to
outwit them, while if he had not overheard their plans, he might have
walked straight into their ambush on the river road.

The shore of the pond was fringed with a sparse growth of saplings and
brush, through which Tad made his way without much difficulty. Beyond
it he could catch glimpses of a broad open space, gleaming palely
in the moonlight. At first he thought it was water--a larger pond,
perhaps--and his heart sank at the idea of having to swim again. But
when he reached the edge of the trees he saw that what lay before him
was a great cotton field, white with opening bloom. Easily half a mile
wide, it stretched back to the north and east so far that his eyes lost
it in the moonlit haze.

Crossing the waist-high cotton was dangerous, Tad knew. He veered to
the left, skirting the end of the field, and at its farther corner
came on a well-defined path leading into the woods. It bore a little
north of west, in the direction he wished to follow, and he could see
from the grass and brush in the track that it was little used. After
a careful scrutiny of the cotton field for pursuers, he went forward
along the path as fast as his weary legs would carry him.

Once the whir of a rattler, behind him, made cold chills run down his
spine and gave speed to his feet. And half a mile farther on he was
frightened almost out of his wits when a partly-grown razor-back boar
leaped up, grunting, from its bed beside the path, and dashed off into
the woods.

When the moon set, Tad had no choice but to stay where he was and
rest. He tried to feel his way along in the inky dark, but after he had
stumbled against trees and nearly lost the path, he gave it up. There
were still two or three hours till dawn, and he was very tired. A few
yards off the path he found a place where he could sit, with his back
against a tree. And in thirty seconds he was asleep.

Fortunately the cramped position he was in woke him before daylight and
he staggered up, stiff and sore, but with his strength renewed. A faint
grayness was beginning to show through the trees, so that now he had no
trouble in following the path. He had a feeling that the river could
not be far off.

A moment later the cheerful blast of a steamboat whistle sounded, close
at hand. Tad’s heart pounded with joy, and he pushed forward almost at
a run. Within a hundred yards he came to a place where he could glimpse
the road, brown and dusty in the increasing light, bending south along
the crest of the bluff.

He abandoned the path and cut into the brush, striking northward with
the highway and the river below on his left. He was looking for a good
place to cross the road and make the descent of the bluff. Just as
he thought he had found such a spot, and was preparing to leave the
shelter of the undergrowth, his ears caught a faint clink of metal. He
crouched where he was, waiting. Soon the sound was repeated, and with
it he heard the musical jingle of a bridle chain. Then came a man’s
voice, muffled, quieting a restless horse, and a moment later he heard
the soft thud of hoofs on grass.

Three mounted men came down the road from Natchez, riding silently in
single file, their lathered horses at a walk. They were wrapped in
cloaks and their hats were pulled low over their faces, but Tad knew
them. The leader rode a big sorrel with three white legs.

Almost opposite Tad they pulled up and talked in low tones for a
minute. He could not hear their words, but their gestures were short
and angry. Hunched there in their saddles, they looked like ruffled
birds of prey.

The leader jerked his horse around, motioned to one of the riders to
stay where he was, and with the other at his heels, set off down the
road. The man who remained looked after them grouchily for a moment,
then swung down from his horse, pulled the reins over his arm, and sat
down with his back against a stump.

As quietly as he knew how, Tad crawled back a dozen yards or more into
the woods. When he was sure the rank growth screened him completely, he
got up and started northward again, fairly holding his breath in his
effort to make no noise.

After a while he knew he was out of earshot of the watcher by the road
and could move faster. The sun rose, bringing beauty to the woods. He
heard negroes singing, and soon a big mule-cart creaked by, with half a
dozen plantation hands on their way to the fields, and a white overseer
riding abreast. Birds made a background of music for all the other
sounds of the waking day.

Tad passed a bend in the road and worked himself down into the bushes
that fringed the ditch beside it. He looked long and listened carefully
in both directions. Then with his heart in his mouth, he made the
dash for the opposite side. Three seconds, and it was done. The brush
whipped shut behind him. He waited a little to see if any one was in
pursuit, then turned and pushed his way through the tangle of vines and
creepers that crowned the edge of the bluff.

There, a hundred feet and more below, was the vast, muddy tide of the
river that had made him feel so lonely and depressed three short weeks
ago. How he welcomed it now! Spread out in a great sunlit panorama, he
saw the little arks and keel-boats go gliding down, no bigger than
chips on the yellow flood. And those tiny black figures, like ants,
that worked at the sweeps or sat about the breakfast fires--those were
his friends. He belonged to their brotherhood now. Old Trader Magoon
and the jolly red-bearded captain from St. Louis, big, brave, awkward,
kind-hearted Abe, and even Allen, with his human failings--they would
all fight for him.

Something like a sob rose in his throat, and he had to choke it back.
What was the matter with him anyway? It must be hunger. He remembered
that he hadn’t eaten much for two days. Well, it was time he was moving.

With another look around, to make sure no one watched him from the
road, he started scrambling down the face of the bluff.




CHAPTER XV


As he descended, Tad could see the levee, below, and half a mile to the
northward the huddled houses of Natchez-under-the-Hill. There was the
big steamboat landing, piled with freight, and beyond it the swarming
flatboat fleet, so close, now, that he almost fancied he could pick out
the little _Katy Roby_ at her moorings.

Clinging by roots and creepers, sliding from one grass tuft to the
next, the boy went swiftly down. At the foot of the steep slope was a
narrow marshy tract hemmed in by the levee. There was no road except
the footway along the levee top, but a few shanties were scattered
here and there--the cabins of free negroes, Tad thought--and among the
evil-looking pools of green water, paths ran from one clump of great
mossy live oaks to the next. He followed one of these, skirting a
stagnant pond where the whole surface was covered with a weedy scum. An
alligator moved lazily, thrusting up its long snout within a yard of
Tad’s heel, and great swarms of mosquitoes rose on all sides to meet
him. He broke into a run.

Beyond the first clump of trees he passed the door of a squalid shack
where dogs yapped at his heels and a frightened black woman wrapped
her skirts about a child that screamed when it saw him. After he had
driven the curs away with a stick, he went on more slowly. The morning
was growing hot, and a desperate thirst possessed him. He thought of
stopping at one of the negro cabins and asking for a drink, but the
sight of the unspeakable filth around them decided him against it.
After all, he was almost there. He could stand another ten minutes.

As he neared the town, the path ran through a dense clump of scrub
willows that reached from the levee almost back to the foot of the
bluff. Tad prudently slipped into this willow thicket as he drew close
to the landing, and squirmed forward till he could command a view of
the big dock, the street, and the flatboats beyond. His first glance
told him it was lucky he had reconnoitered. For in addition to the
handful of negroes who were rolling bales and barrels in the sleepy
sunshine, he saw three horses tied to the rail before a corner tavern,
and three men with hats pulled low over their faces, lounging in the
shadows. One sat on the tavern veranda, watching the street. One
patrolled the landing in leisurely fashion. And one stood idly under a
tree with his eye on the movements of the flatboatmen.

If Murrell was one of them--and Tad thought the tall figure on the
landing was he--he had changed horses since daybreak. The famous
three-stocking sorrel was not among the mounts at the hitching-rail.

All this was a blow to Tad’s hopes. Where he had expected to reach the
haven of the _Katy Roby_ in another moment or two, he saw that he might
now have to wait for hours. His thirst was becoming almost unbearable.
The whole inside of his mouth and his tongue felt parched and swollen.
Mosquitoes in myriads came to sing their shrill refrain around his
head, and other pests, he knew, would soon discover his hiding-place.

At last he could stand the torture of sitting still no longer. He got
to his feet, peering through the willow branches. There, not a hundred
yards away, he could see Allen standing on the forward deck of the
flatboat, smoking his pipe and looking up the town’s main street as if
he were waiting for some one.

If only he could signal him in some way! But there were the three grim
watchers--desperate men, as Tad knew--who would not hesitate to use
their pistols with a fifty-thousand-dollar prize in sight. It might
cost his friends their lives if he showed himself.

He had thought of swimming under the landing, but there would still be
a sixty-foot stretch of water to cross under the hawk eyes of that tall
man, slouching in the shade of a pile of boxes. Still, he reflected,
he could hardly be worse off in the water than dying a slow death by
thirst and mosquitoes here.

Very quietly he made his way through the willows to the levee. The
piling of the dock rose close by--almost close enough to touch. On
his stomach, he crawled over the top of the embankment and slid like
a muskrat into the yellow water beyond. In a few quick strokes he was
under the landing and hidden from view.

He held on to one of the big cypress piles and gulped a swallow or two
of river water to take the edge off his thirst. Then he made his way
forward under the shadowy planking of the wharf.

Suddenly there was a shout, somewhere above, and a pounding of many
feet that went by over his head, shaking dust down through the cracks.
He stayed where he was, his heart beating fast. Then there came the
loud blast of a steamboat whistle, and he understood the reason for the
stampede.

Alternately swimming and stopping to listen, he made his way to the
outer end of the wharf. There, holding to one of the great clumps
of mooring piles, he watched the slim white prow of the pride of the
river--the _Natchez_ herself--come sweeping in to the landing. With
a swiftness at which he marveled, the great paddles swung her into
position, and amid the shouts of deck hands he heard the heavy cable
drop with a crash on the planks over his head. In another moment the
big steamer was moored, side-on to the wharf, and the gangplanks were
run out. The steady rumble of loading began.

From where Tad was he could see forward under the broad overhanging
deck of the _Natchez_ to the low patch of daylight at her bows. And
as he looked, an idea came to him. He remembered how the forward end
of the _Tecumseh_, jutting well beyond the landing, had seemed to
be almost within arm’s reach of the flatboat, that first morning in
Natchez. Under the shelter of the steamer, he could get many feet
closer to his goal without being seen.

He let go of the post to which he had been holding, and swam out under
the boat’s deck. It was like being in a long, low-roofed, watery
tunnel. The deck was only two or three feet above the level of the
river and was built out from the hull a good ten feet. It was shored up
by a row of diagonal braces, and to these Tad clung, pulling himself
slowly along. When he reached the end of the wharf he could see that
his hopes were at least partly justified. The steamer’s prow extended
at least thirty feet nearer to the moored flatboats, and he was certain
that for the best part of that distance he would be well hidden from
eyes on the landing.

Keeping as far as possible under the projecting shelf, he pulled
himself forward by the bracing timbers. Finally he came to a point
where the deck narrowed rapidly toward the bow and no longer afforded
any cover. As nearly as he could judge, about fifteen yards still
separated him from the _Katy Roby_. He was close enough to see every
homely plank and seam of the little craft, even to the familiar marks
of Abe’s mighty ax on the hewn corner posts.

A sudden fear seized him now--a fear that Abe or Allen might appear at
the gunwale and see him. That would be dangerous, he knew.

Obviously, he could not stay where he was. Something had to be done,
and done at once. With desperation in his heart, the boy again measured
the distance to the flatboat, then drew a deep breath, and took off
from the steamer’s side in a long plunge. He had swum under water many
times before, but never when he was so tired, or with so much at stake.

Five strokes he took--ten--twelve, with his lungs ready to burst
for air--thirteen--fourteen--fifteen--sixteen--he _must_ come
up--seventeen--eighteen, and his hand touched planks! He was there,
safe under the flatboat’s counter. For a moment he lay with mouth and
nose just out of water, gasping in the breaths he so sorely needed. A
stray end of rope, hanging from the stern, gave him something to hold
on to.

From the tall, white _Natchez_ there came a jangle of bells and a
thrashing of the water as her paddles turned over. This was Tad’s
chance. All eyes would be on the steamer for the next minute or two.
He took a firm grip on the rope and went up with a kick of his feet.
At the gunwale he had just strength enough left to fling up a leg and
pull himself over. Five seconds later he rolled over the edge of the
after deck and dropped without ceremony into the middle of Allen’s
preparations for dinner.

If Tad had not instantly signaled him to silence it is certain that
the _Katy Roby’s_ cook would have yelled aloud in terror. As it was he
toppled over backward on the planking and sat there looking comically
pale.

“Great--hallelujah--fishhooks!” he choked out, at last. “I shore never
looked to see your face ag’in, boy! How in Tarnation did ye git away?”

“I’ll tell you--pretty soon,” grinned Tad, still too weary to talk.
“Where’s Abe?”

“Up thar in the town--Natchez-’top-o’-the-Hill,” said Allen. “He’s been
tryin’ to git ’em to send a sheriff’s posse arter you. But gosh, boy,
look at them feet!”

Tad was bleeding from half a dozen cuts and bruises that he had got in
the course of his flight. Until now he had not even noticed them. His
shirt was in tatters, and even the stout homespun trousers, in addition
to being heavy with mud and water, had been torn in several places.
Gaunt with hunger and fatigue and wet as a drowned kitten, he looked
little like his usual sturdy self.

But Poke knew him. The gangling baby bear stretched his chain as far as
it would go and licked with a warm pink tongue at Tad’s face. Chuckling
with delight, the boy rolled over to scratch his pet’s inquisitive
round ears. And at that moment a long shadow fell across the deck and
they heard the tread of moccasined feet.

Abe, still frowning and preoccupied with the business that had taken
him ashore, dropped down from the fore deck and almost stepped on Tad
before he saw him.

“Wal, I’ll be--” he began. But his vocabulary, for once, was totally
inadequate to the occasion.

“Quick, Abe!” Tad implored him. “Get down here out of sight, if you’re
going to look like that. There’s three of Murrell’s men watching on the
landing.”

The big Hoosier crouched obediently, but Allen started up with an oath.
“Whar’s that gun o’ mine?” he asked in a belligerent tone.

“Hold on,” said Abe. “Don’t be a dum fool, Allen. This is no time to
git mixed up in a fight. Now we’ve got Tad back, our job is to take him
out o’ here safe. Let’s see, now--Tad, you’d best crawl in under the
edge o’ that tarpaulin, jest in case o’ trouble.

“Allen, you act unconcerned-like, an’ go on gittin’ some dinner
together. I’m goin’ to shove off. Wait, now, till I git to lookin’ glum
ag’in.”

With a comical effort, he twisted his gaunt face into a heavy frown.

“That ought to fool ’em,” he muttered, and stood up, with a dejected
stoop to his shoulders. Slowly he mounted the forward deck, swung over
in a long stride to the next craft, and so reached the mooring-stakes
along the levee. As he cast off the rope and proceeded slowly to coil
it over his arm, a keel-boat man hailed him, three or four boats away.

“What’s up, Longshanks? Gwine to leave without the youngster?” he asked.

Abe shrugged his shoulders. “’Tain’t no use to try any more,” he
replied, gloomily. “They’re all afraid to move, up in the town. I
reckon we might better be gittin’ our cargo to market.”

“Yeah,” agreed the other, and spat over the rail. “It’s tough luck,
though. ‘Good-by, five thousand dollars,’ eh?”

An angry blaze lit Abe’s gray eyes. He started to speak, then changed
his mind. Dropping the coil of rope on the fore deck, he picked up one
of the rowing-sweeps and planted it on firm bottom. Then with a heave
of his mighty shoulders, he drove the _Katy Roby_ straight out from the
levee.

As the current caught them they were swung close to the corner piles of
the wharf. Abe put his oars in the chocks and began rowing, strongly
but without haste.

“Keep hid, now,” came Allen’s whisper. “Thar’s a feller watchin’ us
up thar on the landin’. Big, tall feller with his hat over his eyes.
’Pears like he’s mighty interested in what we’ve got aboard.”

“Wal,” he called out derisively, “think ye’ll be able to reco’nize us
next time?”

There was no answer from the man on the wharf.

“Allen,” said Tad, when they had dropped the landing well astern, “do
you know who that was you hailed? I do. It was Jack Murrell.”

Allen’s face went pale. “No-o!” he said, in an awe-stricken whisper.
“You don’t tell me--_Murrell_!”

“He’ll recognize you, all right,” Tad could not help chuckling. “He
never forgets a face.”

But as the boy rose from his place under the tarpaulin and looked
astern, he wondered if perhaps his jest had been ill-timed. At the
hitching-rail in front of the water-front saloon he could see three men
mounting their horses. They turned, in a swirl of dust, as he watched,
and spurred away up the town’s main street toward the bluff. And
wherever they were going, they evidently meant business.




CHAPTER XVI


Tad kept his misgivings to himself as the flatboat voyaged southward.
Both of his companions were so genuinely happy over his safe return
that nothing else really seemed to matter. They fed him and pampered
him, dried and mended his clothes, and treated him in general like a
long-lost brother.

Tad responded with a full heart. He ate the feast of corn-bread, bacon,
and coffee that Allen prepared, and had no need to feign an appetite.
And to the delighted ears of his companions he unfolded, bit by bit, as
his strength returned, the tale of his capture and escape.

When he described how he first happened to run afoul of the outlaws he
saw Allen redden uneasily, and the baleful glance that Abe turned on
the son of his employer told Tad how deeply the matter must have been
discussed.

He went on to tell of the ride, of the lonely house in the woods, and
of the great black deaf-mute who was Murrell’s servant.

“I’ve heard o’ him,” put in Allen, his eyes wide with excitement.
“Some ark hand from up the Yazoo said he’d done caught a sight of him
once. Most o’ the keel-boat men, though, say they’re sartin he ain’t no
nigger at all, but some sort of a gorilla.”

Tad did not laugh. The horror of those silent visits that Congo had
paid him was still too fresh in his memory.

“No,” he answered. “He’s a man, all right. But, gosh! I believe I’d
_rather_ have a gorilla after me than that big black devil. Ugh!” And
he shivered a little in spite of the noonday heat.

He told them of the arrival of the strangers at the house, and how he
had heard their talk of the doings in Natchez.

“That’s what I was afeared of,” said Abe, with a nod. “Every move I
made in the town, I had a feelin’ there were spies a-watchin’. I was
sure that if we did git a posse together, they’d have wind of it long
’fore we got thar. An’ added to that, all the head folks in Natchez
were either scairt o’ Murrell or else in cahoots with him. I didn’t
rightly know whar to turn next.”

The tall lad’s voice grew gruff, and he shook his head as he looked at
Tad. “That shorely was a mean two days,” he said.

“All over now, though,” replied the boy, with an understanding grin.
And he went on with the recounting of his adventures.

Sometime past the middle of the afternoon they were running eastward on
the outer edge of a great ox-bow bend where the strong current bit deep
into the Mississippi side. Floating swiftly as they were, with the bank
only sixty or seventy yards away, Abe was rowing, and Allen was at the
steering-sweep watching for possible snags. Suddenly Abe pointed at the
top of the bluff, high above them and a little distance upstream.

“Look a’ thar!” he exclaimed. “They’re out o’ sight now, but you’ll see
’em in a jiffy past that clump o’ trees.”

Tad watched with all his eyes, and even Allen turned to look where the
big fellow was pointing. But the seconds passed and nothing happened.

“Ye’d ought to have a sunshade,” the steersman remarked solicitously.
“This heat’s makin’ ye see things.”

Abe frowned in puzzlement. “It beats me,” he said. “I’d ha’ sworn I saw
three men on horseback, gallopin’ along that road on the bluff. What
the ’Nation do ye s’pose become of ’em?”

“Probably thought that long arm o’ your’n was a gun aimed at ’em,”
Allen suggested. But Tad was less inclined to take the incident as a
joke. He approved Abe’s judgment that evening when the lanky oarsman
pulled over toward the western shore.

“I sort o’ feel the need of a change o’ climate,” was Abe’s comment.
“Reckon we’ll find the night air a bit healthier over here in
Louisiana.”

Weary as he was, Tad fell asleep ten minutes after supper was over and
never opened his eyes again until the smoke from the breakfast fire
blew into them next morning. But he knew without being told that his
two friends had stood guard by turns, all night.

“With a good start this mornin’,” said Abe, cocking an eye at the
rising sun, “we’d ought to be ’most a hundred mile from Natchez by
nightfall. I reckon we made thirty-five yesterday. Suits me to git as
far away from that ’ar town as we kin--an’ as fast.”

The rest of the crew being in complete agreement with this idea, they
finished breakfast in a hurry and were soon spinning downstream again.
By noon they had put another thirty miles between them and the scene
of Tad’s capture, and all of them began to breathe easier. But in his
desire to add to the _Katy Roby’s_ speed, Abe pulled a trifle too hard
on one of the forward sweeps, and the deeply-worn handle broke with a
snap.

There was nothing to do but land and make a new one. Abe took the
stern oar and swung over to the Louisiana bank. After they had tied
up it took the two flatboatmen the best part of an hour to find the
kind of tree they liked in this unfamiliar, half-tropical forest.
When at last they had chosen a good-sized sapling, Abe whetted his ax
and hewed swiftly away, first shaping a blade at the butt of the log,
then cutting a long, rough handle out of the straight-grained center.
Finally, with his clasp knife, he smoothed up the inequalities along
the shaft, and before sunset they had a new oar as good as the old one.

Tad, looking out across the river while the others worked, saw what he
took at first for a log drifting down rapidly along the Mississippi
side. It was not until he caught the flash of a paddle that he realized
it was not a log but a dugout canoe. Once, when the little craft was
silhouetted for a moment against a lighter background, he made out a
single dark figure paddling strongly in the stern. The next instant the
canoe vanished past the end of an island.

If Tad had not been nervously keyed up by what he had been through,
it is probable he would hardly have noticed the occurrence. Canoes
were not very common along the lower river, but he had seen them
occasionally, manned by Indians or white trappers, coming down from the
smaller streams.

It was not the craft itself but something swift and furtive in the
motions of the paddler that gave the boy an odd feeling of uneasiness.
However, he did not even mention the canoe to Abe and Allen, for he was
a little ashamed of his vague fears.

When the oar was finished they pushed on for another hour or two, and
Abe was in favor of making up the time they had lost by traveling part
of the night. But the sky, which had been clear most of the afternoon,
had started to cloud up at sunset and was now heavily overcast.

“She’ll be black as yer hat in another hour,” Allen counseled. “With no
moon to help, ye’ll never be able to steer betwixt all these islands.”

“All right,” Abe agreed grudgingly. “But we’ll have to make it watch
an’ watch ag’in tonight, if we tie up here.”

Though Allen could see little sense in this precaution, he finally
consented, provided he could take the first turn, and they made their
mooring for the night. Tad offered to stand one guard, but the others
would not hear of it. Probably he would have made a poor watchman, for
as it turned out he slept again like a log from dark to daylight.

“What d’ye say _now_?” Allen called cheerfully from the breakfast fire
next morning. “Not a sound all night. We jest wasted four hours o’
sleep apiece.”

But Abe, who had gone ashore for more wood, did not reply. He was
stooping over something on the ground, examining it intently.

“Come here a minute,” he said, finally, and both the others went to
join him, sensing a discovery of some kind.

His face wore a curious expression when he looked up. “If I was a real
crackajack at this sort o’ thing,” he said, “I’d tell ye jest when this
yere was made, an’ by what. The way things are, I kin only guess.”

He was kneeling before a little bare patch of black earth. At first Tad
thought there was nothing there. Then he got down beside Abe, and when
he peered closely he saw, very faint across the firm surface, the print
of a naked foot.

Allen whistled softly. “Big b’ar, ain’t it?” he asked.

“Look again,” said Abe, laconically.

The track was long and immensely broad, and the impressions of all five
toes were visible at the end farthest from the river. But Tad, even
with his slight knowledge of woodcraft, knew that a bear track would
show the claw-points beyond the toes.

[Illustration: HE SAW THE PRINT OF A NAKED FOOT]

“It’s a man, isn’t it?” he said, almost in a whisper.

“If it’s a man,” Abe answered slowly, “he’s got the biggest foot I ever
hope to see. It’s as long as mine, an’ most half ag’in as wide. What’s
more, I should say he’d never had a pair o’ shoes on in his life. Look
at them splay toes.”

Tad saw that the print of the great toe was separated by a full inch
from that of the second.

“Who--who do you think made it?” he asked.

Abe considered a moment. “I think it was a nigger,” he said. “Most
likely a runaway slave, but anyhow a mighty big feller--one o’ the
biggest. What I really want to know, though, is when he come by here.
If ’twas last night it must ha’ been in the first few hours, ’cause--”

“No, sirree!” Allen spoke up indignantly. “Everything was quiet ’round
yere in _my watch_--outside o’ the noise you made snorin’.”

Abe grinned. “Wal,” said he, “thar’s no way I know of to settle it. An’
he didn’t do us much harm that I can see. The sensible thing fer us to
do is head south an’ leave him.”

With a last look at the mysterious footprint, they boarded the _Katy
Roby_ once more and shoved out into the current, eating breakfast as
they went.

“Anyhow,” said Allen, casting a sidelong look at the landing-place, “he
was headed away from us when he made that track.” He took a mouthful of
bacon, and then--“I hope he keeps on goin’,” he chuckled.

None of them felt very talkative that morning. They took their turns
at the oars and tiller and kept the flatboat moving at her best
speed, which now averaged four to five miles an hour. The current was
perceptibly slower as they went farther south, and the channel seemed
deeper, with fewer sand-bars. There were numerous jungle-clad islands,
however, and in some of the narrow cuts through which they passed, the
giant creepers and the long festoons of Spanish moss came trailing
across the deck with a cool, slithery sound.

At noon they came into the head of a long open reach, and Abe stopped
rowing to mop his sun-burned forehead.

“Whew!” he breathed. “Hotter’n corn-hoein’ time up home. It takes
somethin’ to make me sweat, too. Wal, we don’t have to work so hard
from now on. Let’s see--” he did some counting on his fingers--“we must
be ’most a hundred an’ ten mile below Natchez right now. We’ll be down
to Baton Rouge ’fore night, an’ I’m told thar’s good landin’s all along
the Sugar Coast, below thar.”

They had left the region of pine forest behind them now and had come
fairly into the heart of old Louisiana. On both sides of the river
were the great Creole plantations with their stately white houses and
stately French names. Sometimes when the flatboat ran close inshore,
they caught intimate glimpses of lovely formal gardens and verandas gay
with laughing girls.

Allen, staring open-mouthed at these creatures of a different world,
turned to Abe at length with a wag of the head.

“By the ol’ jumpin’ sassafras,” he said, “I b’lieve Tad was tellin’
us the truth ’bout wearin’ shoes, back east. Did ye see them two
women-folks jes’ now? White stockin’s _an’_ slippers on, right in the
heat o’ the summer!”

They went past the town of Baton Rouge, late that afternoon. Tad
remembered, as he saw the landing and the stores, that his letter to
his father had never been sent, and asked if he might land.

“Sure ye kin,” said Abe. “But we’ll be in New Orleans ourselves in
another two days--maybe as quick as the mail. Why not wait an’ surprise
yer Pappy, now?”

This suggestion met a ready response from Tad. He could picture that
meeting very clearly, and although he would not postpone his father’s
happiness even by a day if he could avoid it, the idea of a surprise
appealed to him.

They came, in the falling dusk, to a low wooden landing-stage built
out from the levee. There was no house in sight except a long, roofed
storage shed with a few empty molasses barrels piled beneath it, but
a white-painted sign bore the inscription, “La Plantation de Madame
Duquesne.”

Abe ran the broadhorn in alongside the dock and made fast to a post.

“Couldn’t ask fer a snugger place to tie up than this, could ye?” he
asked. “Tad, you run up thar in the cane a ways, an’ cut us some sugar
sticks to chaw. Allen an’ I’ll git the wood an’ water an’ start supper.”

Taking the short hand-ax, the boy followed the top of the levee for a
little distance and turned in along a raised wagon-track that led back
into the tall cane. He went on till he found some pieces that suited
him, cut half a dozen lengths with the ax, and shouldering the bundle,
started back toward the river.

He had almost reached the levee when there was a sudden movement in the
thicket behind him, a crashing of the cane and a sound like the thud of
feet.

Tad did not even wait to glance over his shoulder but made a leap for
the levee and ran along it toward the boat with all his might. When he
got to the landing he looked back. There was no sign nor sound of a
pursuer. The peaceful calm of evening lay over the river and the shore.

“Who were ye racin’ with?” asked Allen jocosely.

Tad recovered his breath and told them in a few words what he had
heard. His face was still pale, and he felt a trifle shaky, but he
tried to laugh it off.

“I guess it was nothing to be afraid of,” he said. “Maybe it was a cow.”

“Or a rabbit,” said Allen. “They make a mighty loud noise sometimes, in
the woods.”

Abe shook his head. “Sounds more like a b’ar, to me,” he put in. “Or it
might even be a panther. At any rate it wouldn’t do a mite o’ harm to
have a fire on the levee tonight. That’d keep the skeeters away as well
as the varmints.”

They gathered more wood, and after supper built a slow-burning fire of
half-green chunks on the levee, close to where the boat was moored.

Tad gave Poke a piece of sugar cane to worry, and watched the delighted
little bear suck the sweetness out of the stick as if it had been a
bottle. They all chewed on the succulent joints of cane till the dark
had settled over the river. Then with the usual good-nights they spread
their blankets and turned in.

“It’s hot tonight,” Abe yawned. “I’m goin’ to give you boys more room.”
And so saying, he took his bed up to the raised deck forward.

In two minutes everything was quiet, aboard. But Tad did not sleep. He
was thinking of the footprint they had found that morning, and of the
noise in the cane. In spite of all the reassuring things he could tell
himself, the thought persisted in his mind that it was not a cow he had
heard--nor a bear--nor even a panther. It was a man.




CHAPTER XVII


Sleep overcame Tad at last, but when it did it was a strange, restless
slumber, full of dreams.

He seemed to be running, leaden-footed, down the bed of an interminable
brook, where at every step the deep, black mud sucked horribly at his
heels. He struggled forward, his heart almost bursting with effort, and
always behind him he could hear the fierce, wild baying of dogs.

The black swamp grew firmer about him, and there in the surface of
the mud he saw a huge track, broad, misshapen, with a great toe that
looked half like a thumb. And suddenly the cry of the hounds ended
in a whimper, and he was fleeing from a pack of huge black stooping
shapes that ran through the woods on their hind legs--more silent--more
terrible than dogs.

He rushed on, stumbled, tried to get up, and found that all the
strength had run out of his body. His pursuers were close upon him
now, enormous in the dark, their long arms stretched to seize him. He
tried to cry out, but no sound would come from his throat. Then through
the fringes of his dream he heard Poke give a frightened squeal that
turned into a growl, and there was a low, startled oath somewhere close
by. And suddenly Tad found himself awake.

He was sitting upright on his blanket in the flatboat, clutching what
he realized was the handle of the ax. Above him, black against the red
glow of the fire, loomed a vast ape-like figure, and there were half a
dozen others moving on the levee and in the boat. He found his voice,
then.

“Abe--Allen!” he screamed, and bounded back against the gunwale,
lifting the ax as he rose. One swift blow, shortened and cramped by
his position, was all he had time to deliver. Then his adversary was
upon him with great, smothering paws that gripped his wrists and almost
cracked the bones. The ax dropped from his hand, but he continued to
struggle, kicking, twisting, fighting for time. And when he looked
up he saw the moon flash on the white, grinning teeth of Congo, the
deaf-mute.

There was a roar and a crash in the fore part of the boat. Abe was in
the fight. He had laid hold of a four-foot oak log and was swinging it
at the end of his long, powerful arms like a cudgel. “Allen, bring the
guns!” he yelled, and leaped forward, tiger-like, upon the attackers.

Two of them went down under his rain of blows. Three others closed
on him savagely, striking with fists and knives, and for a second Tad
could see only a struggling tangle of bodies on the landing. Then Abe
rolled free and bounded to his feet once more. He was still swinging
the great club, and he put all his sinewy young strength into every
smashing blow. His wrath was terrible to see. Never in his life had
he fought as he was fighting now. The black marauders broke and fled,
stumbling, before that onslaught, and Abe followed, giving them no
quarter.

All these events had taken place in the space of a few seconds. Still
gripping Tad by the wrists, Congo had watched the swift, decisive
battle between his confederates and the tall white boy. As they gave
ground, he bared his teeth in a hideous snarl of fury. But he had his
own work to do. The instant the landing was clear, the giant African
seized Tad about the middle, swung him up under one huge arm, and
sprang for the shoreward side of the boat. Locked in a death struggle
with still another negro, Allen could give him no assistance. The boy
caught at the gunwale as they went up, and clinging desperately with
hands and feet, held his captor back for a second or two. Then his grip
was wrenched loose, and the big black scaled the landing and started
with him across the levee.

They were almost in the edge of the cane when Tad heard a thud of feet
behind them. With a hoarse indrawing of breath, Congo turned at bay.
Still clutching his prisoner with his left hand, the deaf-mute raised
his tremendous right arm to demolish the pursuer.

It must have been a long time before he used that arm again. Abe,
coming in on the run, struck downward swiftly, savagely, with the great
oak cudgel. Under that crushing impact the bones parted with a dull
crack, and Congo staggered, dropped Tad, and scuttled into the cane,
the broken arm dangling horribly at his side.

The breath had been squeezed half out of the boy, but as he rose he
managed to gasp “Allen!” and pushed Abe in the direction of the boat.

Allen, it seemed, had taken care of himself. He had been getting the
better of the encounter when his antagonist had seen the others in
flight and had jumped overboard and swum for it.

One half-naked black still lay on the levee, moaning piteously. He had
fallen a victim to Abe’s first attack, and there was an ugly bruise on
his head. The fire went out of the big backwoodsman’s eye as he came to
the side of the wounded negro. Stooping, he carried him to the landing,
washed his broken crown, and wrapped about his head a bandage made of
a piece of his own torn shirt.

Gradually the man returned to full consciousness, and his groaning was
quieted.

“We-all b’longs on de plantation above yere,” he said, in response to
Abe’s questioning. “A white man done promise he gwine git us free if we
he’p dat Congo nigger ketch de young white boy.”

Abe looked at him grimly. “Kin you walk?” he said. The darky got
painfully to his feet and stood looking at the tall young Hoosier in a
palsy of terror.

“What we’d ought to do is tie ye up an’ take ye on down to N’Orleans to
jail,” said Abe. “But in this fersaken country I s’pose they’d skin ye
alive, down thar, an’ that don’t seem hardly fair, either. Go on--march
yerself back whar ye belong, an’ git thar quick, ’fore they find out
ye’re gone.”

For a moment the negro stared at him, goggle-eyed with wonder. Then he
was off, running up the levee as fast as his shaky legs could take him.

“Wal,” said Allen, feeling of a barked elbow, “I reckon none of us is
very sleepy right now.” He went to the fire and threw on dry wood,
poking it till a bright blaze sprang up. “Great wallopin’ catamounts,
Abe, but you sartin did give ’em what-for!” he chuckled. “Next time you
aim to start a ruckus like that, I want to be sure I’m on your side.”

The big youngster ambled into the circle of firelight. “You know me
better’n that, Allen,” he grinned. “You never saw me _start_ a fight in
my life. But I figger when you do have to defend yerself, it pays to go
after the other feller hard enough to put the fear o’ the Lord in him.”

He turned to the boy by his side. “How about ye, Tad--all right?”

“Fine,” said Tad, “but say--how about yourself?” He seized his big
friend by the arm and swung him half around in the firelight. “Didn’t
you know you were bleeding?”

Abe put up a hand to his face and brought it away red and dripping. A
deep gash over his right eye was bathing the side of his head and neck
with blood.

“Huh!” he laughed, “I didn’t even know I had that one. I’ve been
thinkin’ all this time it was sweat I was tastin’. Must ha’ got cut
with a knife in that fracas with the three of ’em, here on the landin’.”

He went down to the river and dipped his head in the water, after which
Tad applied a tight bandage, and the bleeding soon stopped.

“Wal,” said Allen, “I don’t reckon they’ll be back, but I ain’t sleepy
enough to turn in jest yet. What say we mosey along a few miles?”

“Suits me,” Abe replied, “only before we go thar’s one thing I want to
look at.”

He selected a fat pine knot from the fire, and holding it as a torch
to light his steps, walked slowly back to the edge of the cane, where
Congo had vanished. They saw him stoop as if searching for something.
Then he called to them. Looking where he pointed in the soft black
earth, they saw a track--deep, gigantic, splay-toed--the same footprint
that had puzzled them that morning.

“That’s the feller,” said Abe. “You’ve seen him before, I reckon, Tad.
Wasn’t that Murrell’s nigger?”

“Yes,” said Tad, “he must have followed us all the way down from
Natchez.”

“But how in time did he keep up with us?” asked Abe. “He couldn’t ha’
been aboard of a boat, could he?”

Tad told them of the canoe he had glimpsed, stealing between the
islands when Abe was making his oar.

The big flatboatman nodded. “That was him, right enough,” he said.
“Only next time, Tad, don’t be scairt to come right out with what you
think. We might have saved ourselves a heap of exercise tonight if
we’d known they was layin’ for us.”

“Wonder if he planned to paddle clear back to Natchez with Tad in the
dugout,” said Allen as they went back across the levee.

“No,” Abe answered, thoughtfully. “I b’lieve it was three of Murrell’s
gang that I saw gallopin’ down the bluff road that afternoon. Most
likely they’re waitin’ somewhere close, maybe in Baton Rouge, fer this
tongueless, earless devil to bring Tad in. Let’s drift along.”

They put out their fire, went aboard the broadhorn, and cast off the
mooring-lines, glad to see the last of Madame Duquesne’s plantation.




CHAPTER XVIII


Five or six miles below, they sighted a tiny, tree-clad island in
midstream, and there once more made the boat fast. This time nothing
interrupted their slumbers. They were under the west bank of the
island, sheltered by overhanging branches, and the sun was high in the
sky before they woke. It was the merry singing of a crew of river-men,
floating past on their broad raft of steamboat fuel, that roused Tad.
He sat up, saw that the morning was already well along, and gave Allen
a dig in the ribs.

“Ahoy, you lubbers!” he cried. “Roll out! It’s nearly noon.”

He built the breakfast fire, washed himself, and went over to give Poke
his morning greeting. As he started to maul the cub playfully, he saw
him wince. The little bear limped and held up one forepaw in apparent
pain. Looking closer, Tad found that it was bruised, as if it had been
trodden on.

“Look at this, boys,” he called. “Here’s the real hero of the fight.”
And he told how Poke’s growling had first awakened him in the night.

“A mighty good little b’ar,” said Abe approvingly. “If that big-footed
Congo stepped on him, though, he’s lucky he didn’t have his whole leg
squashed.”

Allen produced some bacon fat which was rubbed on the wound and which
Poke at once set about licking off. After that he seemed to feel much
better, and soon was his own droll self again.

Breakfast over, Abe bent his back to the oars, and they soon overhauled
the wood-raft which had passed them. As the flatboat came alongside,
one of the raft-men strolled over to the edge of the logs and hailed
them. He was a tall, rangy Tennesseean in homespun.

“Big doin’s in Baton Rouge las’ night,” said he, shooting a dark stream
of tobacco juice into the yellow current.

“So?” replied Abe. “We tied up down river here a ways, an’ slept
peaceful.”

“Hum, ye don’t look it,” said the raft-man, casting an eye at the
red-tinged bandage around Abe’s head. “I figgered maybe you-all was in
the fight.”

“What fight?” asked Allen.

“Ain’t ye heard? Why, it seems there was a bunch o’ river-men in
Sancho’s bar, down by the levee, an’ Jack Murrell an’ two of his gang
come in an’ ordered drinks. Pretty soon somebody spotted ’em, an’ a
row started. Murrell an’ his men shot their way out, an’ they’d ha’
got clean away, only their hosses took fright and begun rarin’ around.
’Fore Bull Whaley could git mounted somebody put a knife in him--killed
him dead. An’ they grabbed Sam Jukes, too, an’ put him in the lock-up.
Murrell had his luck with him, same as usual. He gits on that ol’
three-stockin’ hoss o’ his an’ goes a-sailin’ off up the north road,
belly to the ground. He ain’t got as many friends in Baton Rouge as he
has up river.”

“He’s got plenty in Natchez,” Abe replied. “If he don’t break his neck
on the way, he’ll be safe enough up thar.”

“Huh!” laughed the raft hand. “Break his neck? Not him! He was born to
be hung.”

They discussed the weather, the state of the river, and General
Jackson’s chances in the coming presidential election. Allen traded a
peck of potatoes for some pipe tobacco, and they were about to pass on,
when the raft-man introduced a new topic.

“Did ye see them notices stuck up around Natchez an’ Baton Rouge?” he
asked. “Five thousand dollars reward fer findin’ some boy that’s lost.
A lad ’bout the size an’ looks o’ the one you got thar, I should say.”
He cast a keen glance in Tad’s direction.

Tad grinned and stood up, stretching, so that his ragged clothes and
sunburnt legs and arms became visible.

“Yeah?” he remarked. “Some rich city kid from back east, wasn’t he?”

If the Tennessee man had had any suspicions, they were allayed. He
nodded. “Some feller was tellin’ how a broadhorn steerer from up the
Ohio had done got hold o’ the boy an’ was boun’ to git the reward,”
said he.

“Humph,” grunted Abe, noncommittally, and dug deep with the oars. The
_Katy Roby_ went lumbering downstream, leaving the raft astern.

“So long,” called Allen and Tad. “See you in New Orleans.”

“Gosh,” chuckled Allen as they drew out of earshot. “You sure fooled
him that time, son. In that rig I doubt if yer own Pappy’d know ye.”

Notwithstanding the late start, Abe had put twenty miles behind them by
the time Allen announced that the noon meal was ready.

He stretched his big arms wearily and wiped away the sweat that was
streaming out from beneath his piratical-looking bandage.

“Wal,” he said, as he sat down, “I promised Tad I’d git him to New
Orleans ’most as soon as the mail, an’ you noticed no steamboats have
passed us yet.”

“Don’t worry,” said Allen. “They will. I jest heard one whistlin’ up
above the bend, four or five minutes ago.”

Sure enough, before Abe had swallowed the last of his tea, they heard
a loud blast close astern, and one of the stately white river steamers
came plowing down the channel. Allen jumped to the sweep and Abe to the
bow oars, and they had barely time to swing the _Katy Roby_ over toward
the right, when the nose of the big craft went sweeping by.

Abe held the flatboat on her course as the wash from the paddles rocked
her. Then he turned, leaning on his oars, and watched the steamer bear
away to the east, rounding a bend.

“Maybe she won’t beat us by so much, at that,” said the big rower with
a laugh. “I’ve got a sort of an idee that that narrow cut, ahead thar,
will save us a few miles.”

Instead of following the steamboat around the curve of the main river,
Abe steered straight for the mouth of the cut, where a channel a
hundred feet wide led between low banks of willow. The current flowing
through this cut was not as rapid as they had found it in some of the
chutes farther north, and Tad remarked on the fact.

“I suppose it’s just because the whole river moves slower down here
near the Gulf,” he said.

Abe made no reply but pulled steadily forward between the close banks
rank with tropical vegetation. For a mile or more the cut ran fairly
straight. Then it began to twist disconcertingly, first west, then
north, then west and south again.

Big live oaks and dark, mysterious-looking cypresses began to appear
along the shores. The water, instead of having the yellow hue they had
seen for the last thousand miles, was a dark brown, but clear enough to
see the snags and weed-clumps two or three feet below the surface.

Rounding still another bend, they came suddenly on a wide reach, unlike
any section of the river they had yet encountered.

Enormous trees shut it in on both sides with high, thick walls of
green. There were flowering vines twining high into the branches of
these trees, and in some places the vermilion-tinted blossoms glowed
like a flame against the dark background.

Along the shores, in the edge of the stream, grew other flowers--solid
masses of pink and purple water hyacinths, like low islands of bloom.
A little breeze came up the reach from the south, and Tad saw a section
of one of these islands detach itself and go drifting up the channel
like a gay-colored pleasure barge.

A blue heron almost as tall as a man looked up from his frog-hunting
and rose on great silent wings, flapping away to the depths of the
cypress swamp. There were no songs of birds to break the funereal
stillness. Even the water was still. If it had any movement, it was so
sluggish that the eye could hardly detect it.

Abe had stopped rowing and stood on the fore deck looking about him.
The quietness affected all of them strangely. They felt like speaking
in whispers.

“Gosh,” murmured Allen, “ain’t it purty here! Spooky, though.”

“It’s purty, right enough,” Abe answered. “But it’s not the
Mississippi. We’ve got into a slack-water, somehow.”

“That’s a fact,” said Allen. “It don’t seem quite like the river, does
it? Jiminy Pete! Look a’ thar! They’s more alligators in this place
than catfish in our creek back home.”

The roaring challenge of a bull ’gator came from down the reach, and
others answered all along the bank. Shattering the quiet of the place
and reëchoing from the tall cypresses, the sound was almost terrifying
in its intensity. Hardly had it died away when the boys heard the
report of a gun, close at hand, and a puff of blue smoke drifted out
from behind a little point.

Allen would have rushed under the shelter to get his own fowling-piece,
but Abe held up a warning hand.

“Wait,” he said in a low voice. “That wasn’t meant fer us. Here he
comes, now.”

Past the point there shot a long, low dugout canoe. A man knelt a
little aft of the middle, driving her along with short, quick paddle
strokes. As he caught sight of the broadhorn he paused with paddle
lifted, as if in astonishment. Then he changed his course and came
slowly toward them.

They saw as he approached that he was a handsome young fellow, with
olive skin and long dark hair--a typical Creole of the river parishes.
In the canoe just in front of him lay a fine silver-mounted shotgun,
and beside it they saw the snowy white plumage of an egret.

“Howdy, friend,” said Abe. “Could you tell us about whar we might be,
now?”

The youth looked them over calmly and a trifle patronizingly.

“I thing you come from up the big riv’,” said he. “_Mais_, you done
los’ the way, huh? You mus’ come t’rough the cut. Dat ain’ righd. The
Mississip’, she make a beeg ben’. This w’ere you are, it is Bayou Tante
Lisette.”

“Thank ye,” said Abe. “I reckon that means we’ve jest got to pull
back.” He dipped deeply with the starboard oar and swung the blunt nose
of the flatboat around.

“Adieu,” said the Creole with a grave little bow, and turned his canoe
down the bayou, in the opposite direction.

Around the tortuous bends Abe retraced his course. It was hard rowing,
and he had very little sympathy from the rest of the crew.

“Seems to me,” snickered Allen, “I recall a feller up near the Wabash
mouth that got a smart answer when he asked whar’bouts he was. Pore
devil of a mover, he was, too, with a hull family o’ kids--not a
tip-top, high-rollin’ river hand like you.”

Abe grinned good-naturedly. “That was up in God’s own country, whar I
knew a thing or two,” he answered. “We all make mistakes when we git in
a strange place. But you kin gamble on it, I won’t make this one twice.”

The afternoon was half gone when they got back into the main river.
Tad had translated the French name of the picturesque backwater into
which they had blundered, and Allen made frequent remarks about Abe’s
excursion to “Aunt Lizzie’s Bay,” as he called it. The long-legged
Hoosier stood it for a while in silence, then made a casual reference
to Memphis and Natchez that effectually silenced his tormentor. Abe had
been rowing almost without a stop since morning and as soon as they
reached the broad yellow flood of the Mississippi once more, he turned
the oars over to Allen.

“I’m glad, as a matter o’ fact, that we got in thar,” the big
backwoodsman told Tad, as he sat down to rest. “Fer years I’ve heard
tell, from the men on the river, about these bayous that go stragglin’
off from the big channel an’ wander through the swamps into the Gulf.
Now I’ve seen one, which I most likely never would, if we hadn’t lost
our way.”

After supper Abe mounted the fore deck again, and they pushed on
steadily until dusk fell. There was a small landing with two or three
houses in sight on the west bank, and to it they directed their course.
Other flatboats were moored along the levee. As Abe tied up close to
them, he hailed the occupants of the nearest craft.

“How fur do ye figger it is to New Orleans?” he asked.

“Not more’n twenty-five mile,” the other flatboat hand replied. “We aim
to make it by noon.”

They spread their blankets and said their good-nights. Tad could not go
to sleep at first for thinking of the morrow. Only a half-day’s journey
to New Orleans and his father! For the twentieth time his eager mind
anticipated their meeting. Would he be recognized? Allen had said even
his own Pappy wouldn’t know him, but he had no fear of that. Tad could
guess at Allen’s thoughts as he lay there on the verge of sleep. They
would be full of the Creole girls and the pretty quadroons, and what a
dashing figure he would cut amongst them in his store clothes.

And Abe--what was he thinking, rolled in his blanket on the forward
deck, under the stars? Not about girls. Tad knew him well enough to
be sure of that. The big young river-man had ideas, queer, searching
ideas about people--all sorts of people, rich and poor--about niggers,
even--and about right and wrong. He wrestled with them just as he had
wrestled with the Tennessee bear-hunter, long and hard, until they were
down.

Tad had some inkling of what this trip meant to him--getting out of
the little backwoods world where he had been raised, and seeing the
great valley and the cities of the South. He thought a lot of Abe. He
liked the big, homely, raw-boned youngster better than any friend he
had ever had. He hoped his father would like him, too. Perhaps he could
give him a good job in the New Orleans office. Perhaps ... but sleep
overtook Tad in the middle of his perhapsing, and he was kidnapped over
the border into dreamland.




CHAPTER XIX


Tad was roused, as he had been on that eventful morning in the Ohio,
nearly four weeks earlier, by Allen’s voice raised in song:

  “Hard upon the beach oar--
     She moves too slow!
   All the way to New Orleans,
     Lo-o-ong time ago-o!”

It was barely daylight; yet the breakfast fire was snapping merrily,
and Abe was busy preparing for a start. As the boy washed himself, he
saw signs of similar activity on board the other broadhorns, and by the
time they were finishing the morning meal, one or two of the craft had
already taken their departure.

Abe sent a loud challenge after them as he cast loose the mooring-line,
and in another thirty seconds he was boiling along in their wake. It
was a brisk morning, with a little breeze from down river ruffling the
water. Everybody’s spirits were high, and for the next half hour all
the rowers put the best they had into the race. By the end of that time
Abe’s brawny strokes had carried the _Katy Roby_ so far into the lead
that there was no longer any hope of catching her, and the other boats
settled down to their normal gait.

Not so Abe. He kept a wrinkle of foam under the flatboat’s square bow
for two hours without a let-up. When at last he snatched a moment’s
rest, he explained his haste to Tad.

“You’ve eaten your last meal o’ hog meat an’ johnny-cake fer a spell,
son,” said he. “I aim to git you down thar in time fer you to have a
civilized dinner with your Paw.”

In spite of the boy’s remonstrances, his big friend kept up the pace.
And sure enough, by a little after ten o’clock they came in sight of
the upper outposts of the city.

Along the left bank the vegetable gardens gave way to scattered
hovels, and they in turn to houses--streets of them--closely built,
all sheltered behind the broad rampart of the levee. Then came the
steamboat landings, and all three of the _Katy Roby’s_ crew stared in
open-mouthed wonder at the ranks of tall stacks and the glistening
white and brasswork of more than thirty steamers moored there, noses in
to the bank.

Even along the water fronts of New York and Philadelphia, Tad had
never seen such swarming activity as he witnessed here. Hundreds of
blacks toiled in the sun, rolling molasses barrels and cotton bales.
Directing them were sharp-faced Yankee merchants and brawny steamboat
mates, with an occasional soft-spoken Creole or gesticulating Spaniard.

Anchored in the curving channel of the river were sailing-ships, big
and little, flying the flags of all the world. There were heavy British
merchantmen, Dutch and Danish brigs, fast-sailing, tall-masted ships
from Boston and New York and Baltimore, French barques, trim West
Indian schooners, and slovenly little lateen-rigged boats from the bays
and inlets along the Gulf.

And then Tad saw the flatboat fleet. For the better part of a mile they
lay along the levee, four, six--sometimes ten deep--a solid mass of
keel-boats, broadhorns, and scows. It was impossible to count them, but
there must have been not less than four or five hundred in sight. And
the noise that rose from them was terrific, as newcomers hailed each
other and fought for places.

“Whew!” said Abe in some dismay. “Thicker’n ants at a camp-meetin’
picnic, ain’t they? How in time are we goin’ to git nigh this town?”

At that moment, almost opposite the _Katy Roby’s_ bow, a keel-boat
was working its way out of the tangle of craft, and Abe backed water
and stood by, ready to enter the space she was about to leave. By
skillful jockeying he worked the nose of the flatboat into the hole and
succeeded in getting in until only one broadhorn separated them from
the shore.

The stout Kentuckian who owned her looked the newcomers over without
any signs of welcome.

“Hyah you-all come a-crowdin’ in,” he grumbled, “an’ next I s’pose
you’ll want to fasten yo’ worm-eaten tub on to mine. Is that so?”

“I’m askin’ you,” grinned Abe. “Will you do us that favor?”

The Kentucky man eyed the big Hoosier from his worn moccasins to his
rugged, fighting face still topped by the blood-stained bandage.

“I reckon so,” said he, and grinned in his turn. “Whar’bouts you from?”

While Abe was telling him he passed the _Katy Roby’s_ line across the
deck of the other boat and took a hitch around one of the mooring-posts
on shore.

“I was born in your state, myself,” Abe told the Kentuckian. “My Paw
moved us across the river when I was seven.”

“Too bad--too bad!” commiserated the stocky flatboatman. “Still, it’s
somethin’ to have come from Kentucky, even if you had the misfortune
not to stay thar.”

He offered Abe a drink from his jug of red-eye, and when it was
politely declined he seemed surprised, but not offended. From that time
on he regarded the Hoosier crew as friends and allies.

“Now then, Tad,” said Abe when all was snug, “we’ll go straight ashore
an’ see if we kin locate your Pappy’s office. Allen’ll take keer of the
cargo fer a spell, won’t ye, Allen?”

The young man in question appeared sheepishly from under the tarpaulin,
with his razor and brush in his hand. “Sure,” he answered. “I jes’
thought I’d shave me up a little, first off, so when I go ashore I
kin talk to the commission merchants ’thout lookin’ too much like a
backwoods jay.”

Abe and Tad scrambled across the Kentucky broadhorn and stepped out on
the wide, sun-baked levee top. Behind them the water, high with the
April freshets, was a good ten feet above the level of the streets to
which they now descended. It gave Tad a queer feeling of insecurity
to see the twin stacks of the steamers standing high above the church
steeples. But that was only a momentary fancy. His attention was
centered on his present errand, and he whistled merrily as he hurried
along beside Abe.

The towering young Hoosier’s strides ate up distance surprisingly, and
they were soon well into the business section of the city. Tad asked
a Creole shopkeeper, in good French, where they might find the Rue
St. Louis, and was told, in funny but understandable English, that it
was the next street but one. Going forward as directed, they quickly
found not only the street but the number they wanted. It was a large,
severe-looking building of three stories, with none of the pretty
tracery of iron balconies that adorned so many of the houses.

The two lads entered the public hallway and climbed the stairs to the
second floor. Tad felt a joyous pounding under his ribs at the sight
of the name JEREMIAH HOPKINS lettered on the door. He opened it with
trembling fingers and entered, Abe following at his heels.

To his disappointment, his father was nowhere in sight. At the rear of
the room a big desk and chair stood--vacant. Two or three clerks sat on
tall stools, scribbling away at their ledgers. A dapper young secretary
with a small mustache and a supercilious air came forward to the rail.

“I’m Thaddeus Hopkins,” said Tad. “Isn’t my father here?”

The man seemed not at all impressed. He stroked his chin with one hand
and smiled cynically.

“So you’re the boy himself, eh?” said he. “Let’s see, you’re
the third--no, the fourth--that’s been here, and you aren’t the
likeliest-looking one of the lot, at that. You’ve come for the reward,
I suppose?”

“No,” Tad replied, somewhat nettled by the fellow’s attitude. “I
haven’t come for any reward. I’ve come to see my father. Where is he?”

The secretary scowled. “Now see here,” said he, “don’t give me any more
of your impudence, or I’ll have you arrested. Mr. Hopkins went up river
some days ago--to follow up an important clue,” he added weightily, as
if to settle the matter.

Abe looked at Tad and grinned, and seeing him, the young man with the
mustache flew into a rage. “Get out of here!” he cried. “Get out at
once, before I call the police. And if I catch you in here again I’ll
use a cane on you!”

Tad’s sense of humor got the better of his wrath, at that. He stopped
short of the hot answer he had started to make, and laughed, with
Abe, at the sheer ridiculousness of the affair. They went slowly to
the door. On the threshold Tad turned and looked once more at the
secretary, who was now fairly purple with indignation.

“All right,” said the boy, trying to hold back his laughter, “you’d
better keep that cane handy, because we’ll be back.” And he closed the
door quietly in the face of the sputtering clerk.

When they reached the street once more, Abe looked at Tad with a droll
expression and shook his head.

“I can’t rightly blame the feller,” he chuckled. “I never thought
how we were goin’ to look, an’ you wouldn’t be taken fer any swell
Easterner, ye know.”

Tad glanced down at his costume. It was the first time he had even
thought about his appearance for weeks. And as he realized how he must
have looked to the dapperly attired young underling in his father’s
office, he burst into another shout of merriment.

His shirt was in rags, with one sleeve torn out entirely at the
shoulder. The butternut breeches of Abe’s purchase had stood up better
under hard service, but even they were tattered in several places, and
very dirty. His bare feet and legs still showed the marks of the many
scrapes and scratches he had got in his adventure with the outlaws.
And he knew that his skin, tanned to the color of an Indian’s, and his
uncombed thatch of hair, must give him anything but a prepossessing
appearance.

“I reckon what ye really need,” said Abe, “is a bran’ new suit o’ store
clothes, an’ a hair-cut. Then maybe some stockin’s an’ shoes an’ a
necktie might help. ’Bout twelve dollars an’ a half in gov’ment notes,
an’ you’d be the real Tad Hopkins ag’in, ’stead o’ jest a plain, ornery
little river-rat. The only question now is, whar are we a-goin’ to
git that much cash? Speakin’ fer myself, jest at the present moment I
haven’t got even one lonesome cent. Looks like I’d have to break my
promise an’ take ye back to eat aboard the boat ag’in.”

They wandered through the hot streets, picturesque but smelly, and came
at length to the levee market, where long rows of booths under brightly
striped canopies displayed eatables of every sort. There were rice and
green corn, ginger, all kinds of berries, oranges and bananas, live
fowls tied in threes and hanging by their legs, quail and other game,
fish and shrimps from the Gulf, and craw-fish, sold by wrinkled old
Choctaw Indian women.

At some of the stalls mulattoes held up chocolate in big steaming cups,
and from others came the delicious odor of hot rice and gumbo.

“Hm,” said Abe, “’twon’t do to hang ’round here very long. I’m
commencin’ to git mighty hungry.”

They threaded their way through the crowds of Creole housewives with
their black servants carrying market baskets, and emerged in front of a
long warehouse opening on the levee near the steamboat landing.

Before this warehouse stood a two-horse dray, partly loaded with
barrels and boxes, and around it were three negroes apparently
waiting for something. A well-dressed, elderly white man fumed up and
down meanwhile, and expressed his opinion of the colored race in no
uncertain terms. As Tad and Abe drew near, he addressed his remarks to
them.

“Look at this,” he snorted. “For fifteen minutes these good-for-nothing
niggers of mine have been standing around waiting for some one to fetch
a plank so that they can roll a barrel of indigo on to this wagon. The
_Maid of Camberwell_ sails on the next tide, and we have to haul the
goods a mile to where her lighter is moored. If these blankety-blank
sons of Ham were worth their salt, they could hoist the barrel up by
hand, and I’d have some chance of making this ship. The next cargo for
Liverpool may not go out for a month.”

Abe strolled up to the huge blue-stained barrel and tipped it a little
with his hand.

“How much is it worth to you to git it loaded?” he asked the owner.

“How much! I’d give a dollar to have that indigo on the dray,” he
replied.

“All right,” said Abe, “that’s a bargain.”

He rolled the barrel up to the rear of the wagon, spat on his hands,
placed his feet carefully and put his arms, back, and knees into a
single mighty heave. With a resounding thump, five hundred pounds of
indigo landed on the tailboard and were rolled forward to stand beside
the rest of the load.

Abe dusted off his hands and jumped lightly to the ground. He was not
even breathing hard.

The merchant was still standing in the same spot, open-mouthed with
astonishment.

“Great heavens, man!” he stammered, when he could find words. “Why,
it’s amazing, sir--astounding! I can’t believe my eyes! Here--” and he
thrust a hand into his pocket--“I’ll be better than my word. Here’s a
two-dollar note.”

Abe hesitated. “I ’greed to do it fer one,” he said. “Still, if you
mean it, I’ll accept your offer. The boy, here, an’ I--we kin sure use
it.” He took the bill, thanked the merchant, and they went on.

“Tad,” grinned the long-shanked Hoosier, as he gave the boy’s arm a
squeeze, “by the sun an’ by my in’ard feelin’s it ’pears to be past
noon. I vote we head straight fer one o’ those rice an’ gumbo places.”

They retraced their steps and were soon served with bowls of the savory
stuff, ladled out of a huge copper pot by a motherly-looking quadroon
woman.

Tad smacked his lips. “Mm, tastes good, doesn’t it?” he said. “How much
did it cost?”

“Four cents apiece,” Abe answered. “We could live ashore quite a spell
on our two dollars, couldn’t we? Golly! Two dollars! That’s the easiest
money I ever made. Why, think--it’s the same as a whole week’s pay
navigatin’ the _Katy Roby_!”

They bought half a dozen oranges as a special treat--Abe had never
eaten one in his life--and went back to the place where their flatboat
was tied up.

Allen looked up in surprise from the pans he was washing. “You back,
Tad?” he exclaimed. “I figgered nex’ time I saw you, it would be in one
o’ them shiny two-hoss carriages with a brass-buttoned nigger up in
front.”

They related the happenings of the morning, and Allen roared with
laughter. “Wal,” said he, “we’re bound to stay here fer a couple more
days anyhow. None of the commission men kin handle the cargo short o’
that time. An’ you’re welcome to sleep on board here as long as you’ve
a mind to.”

“Thanks,” said Tad, “I guess I’ll have to do that, until Dad comes back
from up river.”

While he was ashore Allen had left the boat under the guardianship of
their neighbor, the Kentucky man. “I don’t see him anywheres around
now,” said he, “but you folks don’t need to stay here. I’ll watch the
stuff this afternoon, an’ then you kin take charge after supper. Reckon
I’d rather go ashore in the evenin’, when it’s cooler, anyway.”

Abe and Tad laughed at him, but they were glad to fall in with
his idea, for both of them wanted to see the town. They made such
repairs as they could to their clothes, and Abe hauled out from some
hiding-place a treasured old coonskin cap.

“This’ll keep the sun off my head,” he explained, “an’ I reckon in the
city it looks better’n no hat at all.”

Tad tried to reason with him, but it was to no purpose. Abe topped off
his six feet four of homespun shirt, buckskin breeches, and moccasins
with the moth-eaten fur cap, and they set forth.




CHAPTER XX


New Orleans, in that spring of 1828, was as strange and fascinating a
place as ever two boys wandered through on a sunny afternoon.

It was a big town--big even to the eyes of Tad, who had seen other
cities. Fifty thousand people lived in it, and there were usually two
or three thousand sailors from the ships in port besides perhaps five
thousand wild, roistering river-men jostling through the streets.

With half the commerce of the vast Mississippi Valley pouring through
it, New Orleans was growing and spreading like one of its own rank
tropical weeds. It had swept past the walls and moats of the old
French-Spanish city years before, and now its newer sections filled
most of the crescent-shaped bend above the original town.

It was along the levee of this new part of the city that the flatboat
fleet was moored, and the first mile that Abe and Tad traversed was
through raw, fresh-built streets that had little of the picturesque
about them. Only here and there ancient French houses, set among great
trees, showed where the country estates of rich Creoles had once stood.

But when they crossed Canal Street they found themselves breathing a
different atmosphere. There was none of the bustling newness of the
American quarter. The houses, large and small, had cozy walled gardens
and shady balconies, and even the flagstones seemed to drowse in the
warm sunshine.

From this residential district they bore southward again and came to a
region of old shops, old offices, and here and there a venerable church
or public building.

There seemed to be few people stirring at this time of day in the more
ancient part of the city. But as they neared the water front they found
the streets busier.

At one place in particular a crowd seemed to be collected. It was a
ramshackle old hotel building with a driveway leading to an inner
courtyard. On the sidewalk before the building and passing in and out
were little knots and groups of men, talking and smoking Havana cigars.
By far the larger number of these men were prosperous-looking planters
from up and down the river and the outlying parishes. They were easily
distinguishable by their broad-brimmed felt hats and riding-boots, and
by their talk, which was of crops and horses and negroes--mostly of
negroes.

Two or three printed posters were tacked up on the wall of the
building, and Tad strolled over to read them. One said:

“Runaway--a bright mulatto boy named Cassius, about eighteen years old,
strong and large. Will probably head north, as he was Kentucky raised.”

Another advertised: “For sale, a mighty valuable woman, twenty-five
with three likely children. A bargain for the lot.”

The third and largest poster was what particularly attracted Tad’s
attention, however. As he finished reading it he beckoned to Abe. It
said:

“On these premises, every Tuesday and Saturday afternoon, will be held
regular auctions of negroes. We have now on hand a large, well selected
stock of field hands, house boys, cooks, seamstresses, etc., and will
sell as low as any house in New Orleans. Fresh arrivals keep our stock
in prime condition at all times, and we have our own jail and yard for
boarding them.”

“Abe,” Tad asked, “isn’t this Saturday?”

“Let’s see, so ’tis,” responded Abe. “Want to go in?”

Tad hesitated. “Not much,” said he, “and yet it’s one of the things to
see in New Orleans.”

Abe led the way through the driveway into the courtyard. The throng of
planters and city men inside made way grudgingly for the tall young
backwoodsman in his outlandish costume, and Abe edged forward until he
reached a place where both Tad and himself had a view of the auction
platform.

The auctioneer was a big, red-faced, jolly-looking man who spoke in a
loud voice and was given to coarse jokes when he found the bidding too
slow to suit him.

On the ground beside the block stood a row of eight or ten negroes
awaiting their turn to be sold. Occasionally one of the planters would
go up to a slave, poke him in the ribs, feel of his arms and legs and
look him over much as a buyer of cattle would do. In the group of
negroes Tad saw a bent old woman with gray hair, one or two handsome
young mulatto girls, a smart-looking saddle-colored boy with the
manners of a Virginia-bred house servant, and half a dozen coal-black
Guinea negroes, scantily clothed in dingy cotton. On the faces of these
last there was a wild, stupid, frightened look, quite different from
the lazy good humor that Tad had always associated with their race.
When he looked closely he saw that one staggered a little as if from
weakness, and on the ankles of three or four he could make out raw, new
scars--chain and fetter scars.

Abe had seen them, too. “They’re just off the slaver,” he whispered.
“Smuggled in through the bayous--bet they haven’t been ashore more’n a
week. Look at that pore devil that’s sick!”

The auctioneer had one of the young mulatto women on the block now.
He pinched her sportively, chucked her under the chin, and made some
ribald remark heard only by the men just below him. Then he brought
down his gavel with a thump.

“Well, gents, what am I offered?” he inquired genially. “A thousand
dollars as a starter wouldn’t be a bit too much for this wench. They
don’t come no better built. A mite broad in the shoulders perhaps, but
that’s what a good house-work nigger needs. Look her over, now. Take
yo’ time. Now, who’ll offer a thousand? No? Not yet, eh? Well, start
her at five hundred, then. What d’ye say? Will the tall gentleman in
the fur cap make it five hundred for this prime yaller gal?”

There was a titter in the crowd, but Abe remained silent and impassive
while the bidding went forward. Only Tad, looking up at him sidewise,
could see a hard white ridge under the tanned skin of his jaw.

The girl was sold at last, and the auctioneer replaced her with the
feeble old grandmother, who was poked and prodded into straightening
her bent back a trifle and stepping briskly about on the block.

“Now here’s one that’s a bargain,” began the loud, droning voice of the
seller. “There’s three or four years of good hard work under her black
hide yet. Now I’ll take a starting offer of forty dollars. Who’ll say
forty?”

Abe nudged the boy at his side. “Come on,” he muttered. “I can’t stand
any more of this.”

Once outside, the tall young river-man took off his cap and wiped the
sweat from his forehead with his sleeve.

“Tad,” he said, almost fiercely, “it’s all wrong--this whole slavery
business--as wrong as murder. Let’s get away from that place.”

He was sober and silent as they crossed Jackson Square, the old Place
d’Armes of the Creoles, and it was not until they had walked up the
levee for some distance and were nearing the flatboat moorings again
that his old good humor returned.

“Golly,” he marveled. “Aren’t they a sight? I bet ye could walk a mile
on nothin’ but boats an’ never wet a toe.”

They found Allen ready to set forth on his evening’s adventure. He was
attired in all his finery and had his hair slicked down so that it
shone.

“What the Sam Hill is that on yer head?” asked Abe. “Lard?”

“No,” answered Allen proudly, “that’s genuwine b’ar’s grease. I
borrowed it from a Tennessee man--third boat up.”

“Say, speakin’ o’ b’ars,” said Abe, “whar’s that good-fer-nothin’ Poke?”

“Oh,” Allen replied, a trifle shamefacedly, “he done pulled his staple
an’ walked off ’fore I could ketch him. He was clear up on the levee
an’ headin’ west, last sight I had of him.”

Abe looked at him with withering scorn. “You must ha’ taken a lot o’
care o’ the boat,” said he. “It’s a durn wonder the pork an’ provisions
didn’t climb out o’ the hold an’ walk off, too.”

These and other sarcastic remarks made Allen’s supper uncomfortable,
and he was in a hurry to leave as soon as it was eaten.

Abe and Tad watched the young Hoosier dandy depart down the levee, then
set to work straightening up the boat. They enjoyed the cool evening
breeze for a while, and when the first stars appeared, they spread
their blankets and went to sleep.

What time Allen returned they did not know, but he was there in the bed
next morning, far too drowsy to do more than open one eye when they
called him to breakfast.

They heard church bells tolling in different parts of the city and
remembered that it was Sunday morning. That was the only indication of
the day, for as the town awoke there was anything but a Sabbath calm in
the air.

All the saloons, dance halls, and gambling-places along the water
front were open for business, and the thousands of river-men and
sailors thronging the levee brought them plenty of it. Above the din
of shouting, fighting, and merry-making, Abe had to talk loud to make
himself heard.

“Allen won’t want to go ashore again fer a spell,” he said. “We kin
leave the boat to him an’ go lookin’ fer that cub o’ yours.”

Tad, who had been considerably cast down by the loss of his pet, was
eager to follow Abe’s suggestion. They took their way along the water
front, asking people they met if they had seen the little black bear.
For the most part the question was greeted with jeers or with blank
astonishment. But once they encountered a half-drunken raft hand who
testified somewhat hazily to having seen not merely one bear but a pair
of them, dragging chains after them, and moving in the direction of
the steamboat moorings. And a voluble Creole in a little tobacco shop
told them that a bear “so beeg as a cow” had looked in the door at him,
growled, and passed on.

“That b’ar knows what he’s about,” chuckled Abe. “He aims to travel
back to Tennessee by steamboat--that’s sartin.”

A little farther on they asked their question of a British sailorman,
and he nodded and pointed up the nearest street.

“Aye,” said he, “that must be the one they caught this mornin’ and are
goin’ to bait with dogs. There’s a bit of excitement up at the public
’ouse yonder. Perhaps they’ve started already.”

As the two lads hurried forward, they saw that the “bit of excitement”
had more the look of a general street fight.

A crowd of fifteen or twenty ark hands, all riotously drunk, were
milling about a smaller group that seemed to be made up chiefly of
steamboat men. In the center was a short, sturdy Irishman, with his
blue cap cocked at a pugnacious angle and the joy of battle in his blue
eyes. Tad would have recognized that freckled face anywhere. It was
Dennis McCann, the mate of the _Ohio Belle_. And crouched between his
bowed seaman’s legs was little black Poke.

Already fists were flying, and matters looked bad for the steamboat
men when Abe hit the fringe of the mob like a tornado, with Tad right
at his heels. Some he knocked down with his fists, some he flung out
of his path, and those who came back for more were treated to a double
dose. The vicious flank attack confused the backwoodsmen, and before
they could rally, the steamboat crew were pummeling them from in front.
In a moment the battle had turned into a rout. Some ran down the street
with the victors at their heels, and others took refuge in the saloon.

“Here,” panted Abe to McCann, “let’s take the b’ar an’ git out o’ this
’fore they git together ag’in.”

To the little Irishman, who had been slugging away blindly in the
middle of the mêlée, all wearers of buckskin and homespun were enemies.

“An’ who the divil might you be?” he growled, bristling.

“Hold on,” interposed Tad. “Don’t you know me? You gave me breakfast on
the _Ohio Belle_ a month ago.”

McCann’s eyes bulged. “Sure an’ it’s the lad that disappeared!” he
cried. “It’s himself that’s in it, the saints be praised! Come to me,
b’y, an’ let me look at ye!”

He wrung Tad’s hand with both of his, and then gripped Abe’s big fist
when the backwoods youth was introduced as a friend.

“So the little cub here is yours?” said McCann. “Begorra, he come
a-strayin’ past our moorin’ last night, an’ thinks I, we’ll have a
mascot aboard the _Ohio Belle_. So I catches him, an’ ties him to a
beam. But this mornin’ he was gone again, an’ when I come ashore I seen
a bunch o’ these roustabouts gettin’ ready to murther him with dogs. So
I steps in an’ grabs him, an’ that’s that. But come on board the boat
with me now, an’ tell me how it comes ye’re not restin’ this minute at
the bottom o’ the Ohio.”

They followed the mate to his cabin on the steamer, and Tad had his
first chance to unfold the long tale of his adventures. As he described
how he was held prisoner by the outlaws, McCann rose and paced the room.

“Begob,” said he, “an’ it’s sorry I am that I didn’t know the man
Murrell was aboard. Think o’ the grand chances I had to bash him with
a belayin’-pin. An’ him cleanin’ out the gamblers with the money he
robbed you of!”

Tad concluded his story by telling of the treatment he had received at
his father’s office.

“Mr. McCann,” Abe put in, “I reckon you might be able to identify the
lad. They seem powerful hard to satisfy, but they sure ought to take
your word.”

“Faith, an’ I’ll try,” said the steamboat man. “I’ll go with ye
tomorrer mornin’ whin the office opens. But I’ve got the afternoon off
today. I’ll take ye ’round the town.”

And when they had been all over the _Ohio Belle_ and Tad had shown Abe
the stateroom where he had slept and the rail over which he had been
thrown, they left Poke securely chained, and started forth with the
little Irishman as their guide.




CHAPTER XXI


Dennis McCann knew a lot about New Orleans. He had been spending days
exploring the town every time he got into port, and there were few
corners into which he had not penetrated. He took Tad and Abe a good
ten miles that Sunday afternoon, and Tad, at least, was footsore before
they finished.

First the mate of the _Ohio Belle_ led them northward and eastward
through the hot streets to the green flats at the rear of the town. As
they went they were joined by other groups bound in the same direction,
and soon they found themselves part of a huge throng, all moving
steadily out toward the Congo Plains.

Rising above the dust of the crowds, they saw the rough timber
amphitheater of the bull ring, and near it the gaudy-hued canvas
of a huge tent. There was no bullfight scheduled for that day, but
Cayetano’s famous circus was in full swing.

Pushing forward with the throng, they entered the big top, where
snake-charmers and sleek-skinned yellow dancers vied for attention
with two-headed calves, fat ladies, and real wild animals in cages.

The latter appealed most to Abe. He had read of lions in _Æsop’s
Fables_, but never had he beheld one nor heard one roar, and Tad
laughed to see the six-foot Hoosier jump and shiver when that bass
thunder sounded behind him.

When they had finished with the circus, McCann led the way to another
marvel--the roadbed of the New Orleans and Pontchartrain Railway which
was to connect the city with the lake on the north.

This was to be one of the first steam railroads in the world, and Abe
and Tad looked with awe on the preparations for it. People even said
that with a steam engine on wheels, such as the owners proposed to run,
you could pull half a dozen big wagons at once along level rails!

“As strong as six teams of horses, Abe! Do you believe that?” asked Tad.

“Yes,” said the backwoodsman, “reckon I do, after seein’ a steamboat
work. But when they tell me this thing is _faster_ than horses, I’ll
admit I’m a leetle bit doubtful.”

They came back in the cool of the early evening and strolled along
the levee above the town to the park-like drive where a long parade
of carriages wound among the China trees. Planters and their wives,
aristocratic Creole families, and the beautiful women of the free
quadroon caste went smiling by, behind their smartly trotting horses.

From a little lake a flock of pelicans rose on heavy wings and flapped
away across the sunset to their nests. Fireflies began to twinkle in
the gathering dusk. A guitar was strumming softly near by.

“Golly,” murmured Tad, “I shouldn’t wonder if Heaven must be something
like this!”

Abe’s face was overspread by a grin. “Only,” said he, “in Heaven the
folks have wings, an’ the mosquitoes don’t.” And he emphasized his
remark by slapping himself on the back of the neck.

They strolled back through a summer night that was breathlessly hot in
the narrow streets and cooled by a little breeze along the levee.

“Huh,” mused Abe. “Here it’s actin’ like mid-July, an’ in a couple o’
weeks I’ll be back in May again, with the trees jes’ comin’ into full
leaf an’ the lilacs hardly done bloomin’ in the dooryards.”

“When’ll ye be leavin’?” asked McCann. “We’ve got ’most a cargo now,
an’ if ye were ready by tomorrer, say, I might get ye a berth an’ a
chance to earn yer board loadin’ wood fer the engines.”

Abe thanked him. “First of all,” said he, “I want to see Tad out o’
this scrape. An’ second, I’ve got to keep my partner, Allen Gentry,
from gittin’ _into_ one, when he sells his goods. After that I’d be
pleased to ship with you.”

As they parted from McCann at the gangplank of the _Ohio Belle_, the
little Irishman pointed to Poke, snoring comfortably at the end of his
chain on deck.

“See,” he laughed, “the little spalpeen is right at home. I’ll give ye
three dollars fer him.”

Tad considered a moment. He could hardly hope to keep the cub with him,
either in the city or at school, while with McCann he knew the little
bear would be in good hands.

“Right,” he answered regretfully, and the transaction was completed,
then and there. As the boy trudged along at Abe’s side, he pulled the
money out of his pocket.

“Here,” said he, “this’ll pay for those pants, Abe. And anyway, the
bear was really yours. You saved his life and then wrestled for him.”

“No sech of a thing!” said Abe warmly. “That b’ar b’longed to you.”

But Tad was adamant, and his big friend finally took the money, on
condition that he should buy them both a supper out of it. Accordingly
they stopped at the next tavern and ordered a meal. The table at which
they sat was at the rear of the sanded floor near one end of the bar.
A cosmopolitan throng of sailors and up-river men were drinking and
quarreling noisily along the mahogany rail, and Tad watched them while
Abe picked the bones of his fricasseed chicken.

Suddenly, in the crowd, he caught sight of a familiar back and saw a
hand filled with banknotes waving in the air.

“Quick, Abe!” said the boy. “Isn’t that Allen with all that money?”

The long-shanked backwoodsman turned, pushing back his chair, and
looked where Tad was pointing. At that moment a big German sailor
reached over the heads of the eager fellows who surrounded Allen,
seized his wrist with one hand, and snatched away the bills with the
other. It was all done so quickly that none of the men at the bar knew
what had happened, and Allen was left speechless, his empty fingers
clawing at the air.

Then Abe entered the picture. In three long strides he reached the
sailor, who was just edging toward the door. The man’s back was toward
him. Abe caught him by the shoulder with iron fingers and jerked him
around. And almost in the same motion he drove a solid smash to the
fellow’s chin with his right fist.

The sailor lost his balance, staggered back a step or two, and toppled
to the floor. Quick as a flash Abe was on top of him, gripping his
wrists in those big, horny paws of his. With an anguished groan the
German let go of the roll of money, and Abe, picking it up, jumped
to his feet. As he did so an empty bottle whizzed past his head, and
half a dozen sailormen charged toward him from all parts of the room.
Instantly pandemonium was let loose. With wild yells of delight the
river-men, always ready for a fight, set upon the deep-water sailors,
and in ten seconds the place was filled with fiercely struggling groups.

Abe stuffed the bills into the breast of his shirt and battled his way
toward the door, where Tad was already waiting for him. In a moment
Allen broke through the mob in front of the bar and joined them. His
“store clothes” were disheveled, and one eye was nearly closed by a
rapidly swelling bruise.

“Run--run!” he panted, and dodged down an alley with the two others
following him. Not until they had zigzagged through the dark for two
blocks and were out on the open levee front did Allen settle down once
more to a walk.

“Great shiverin’ snakes!” he gasped, “I was glad to git clear o’ that
place! Did ye see ’em start to pull their knives? Why, thar was enough
dirks an’ daggers out to slaughter a regiment.”

Silently Abe handed the crumpled banknotes back to their owner. A few
steps farther he stopped. “You boys wait here,” he said. “I forgot
somethin’, but I’ll be right back.”

Dumfounded, they watched him stride along the levee in the direction
from which they had just come.

“Whar in Sam Hill kin he be goin’?” muttered Allen. They waited with
growing nervousness for several minutes. And just as Tad was starting
to see what had happened, he reappeared.

“Where were you, Abe?” the boy asked.

“I’d clean forgot to pay fer our supper,” Abe replied. “Things had
quieted down thar a mite, but one pore feller was bleedin’ terrible.
Cut pretty bad, I guess.”

“Wal,” said Allen, looking at him, pop-eyed, “if you ain’t the
gol-durnedest!”

“How’d you come to have all that money?” inquired Abe. “Must have sold
the cargo, didn’t ye?”

Allen nodded. “A man come along the levee this afternoon offerin’
scandalous low prices fer flour an’ pork. I was gittin’ sick o’
waitin’; so I dickered with him. I got him to raise his figger a
little, an’ he ’greed to take the boat, too. Anyhow, Father’ll be
satisfied.”

“He won’t if you go in any more saloons an’ git it stole,” said Abe. “I
reckon on board a steamboat is the safest place fer you an’ me.”

They returned to the _Katy Roby_, now empty save for their blankets
and personal belongings, a few cooking utensils, and a small pile of
firewood.

“The old gal looks sort o’ lonesome, don’t she?” said Abe. “Wal,
her timbers’ll make a stout shanty fer somebody. There’s not a
cross-grained stick in her hull. I know, because I cut an’ trimmed ’em
myself.”

The other two were silent, for they also felt a twinge of homesickness
at the idea of leaving the craft. Tad stretched out on the bare
planking, ready for sleep after his miles of barefoot exploration. Soon
he dropped off, in spite of the raucous chorus of drunken river-men
returning to their boats, and it was to bright morning sunlight that he
next opened his eyes. Abe was busy preparing some odds and ends of food
for breakfast, while Allen sat back and plucked at his banjo strings.
It was the old tune of “Skip to my Lou” that he was singing, but he had
invented some new verses. Two of them were:

  “N’Orleans gals, you’re feelin’ blue,
   N’Orleans gals, you’re feelin’ blue,
   N’Orleans gals, you’re feelin’ blue,
   Skip to my Lou, my darlin’.

  “We’re bound to say good-by to you,
   We’re bound to say good-by to you,
   We’re bound to say good-by to you,
   Skip to my Lou, my darlin’.”

He rolled his eyes sentimentally as he sang, and Abe chuckled over the
frying-pan. “Wait till he gits back to Gentryville!” he said. “Folks
up thar will git the idee that the whole valley’s littered up with the
hearts he’s broke.”

When breakfast was finished, Abe rolled up his ax and one or two other
things he owned in his blanket, tied it with a rope, and laid it to one
side.

“Now, Tad,” said he, “we’ll go an’ rouse out this man McCann, so he kin
tell that lunkhead in your father’s office who you are.”

They took their way along the levee in the direction of the steamboat
landings. When they had covered a little over half the distance, they
saw a two-horse carriage coming rapidly toward them, and as it drew
close, Abe pulled Tad out of its path behind a pile of baled cotton.
Thus it was not until the carriage had gone past that the boy had a
good look at its occupant. He was a big-framed man of middle age, in
a beaver hat that looked travel-stained. His head and shoulders were
bowed slightly as if by a burden.

Tad seized Abe’s arm. “That was my Dad!” he said. “He’s on his way to
the office from the boat. Come on!”

Quickly they turned and followed the carriage toward the older section
of the town. A few minutes of alternate running and walking brought
them to St. Louis Street, and at the curb, sure enough, they saw the
carriage drawn up.

They went into the building and up the stairs, two at a time. The door
of the office stood ajar. Tad entered first. There at his desk on the
other side of the room sat his father, looking so gray and sad and
careworn that Tad felt a great lump in his throat at the sight. He
tried to shout “Dad!” but all that came was a choking sound.

The officious young secretary advanced from his corner with what was
intended for a threatening scowl, but Tad paid no attention to him.
Then Jeremiah Hopkins must have sensed that something was happening,
for he looked up wearily from the papers in his hands and saw a boy at
the gate--a ragged, barefoot youngster, brown as an Indian, with a mop
of sandy hair and a mouth that grinned broadly while his eyes blinked
back something suspiciously like tears.

“D-don’t you know me, Dad?” said the boy. And then Jeremiah Hopkins ran
toward him and they caught each other in a bear-like hug.

The father’s heart was too full for words, but he held the lad at arm’s
length and looked at him as if he could never get enough of the sight.

Tad’s power of speech came back to him first, and he talked in happy,
jumbled sentences, trying to tell everything at once.

“I wrote to you, Dad,” he said, “but, you see, you never got my letter
because it was blown up. It was on the _Nancy Jones_. But it’s too bad
you worried so about me. I was all right. Abe, here, was taking care of
me, and-- Come, I want you to meet him. Abe--”

But the young husky from Indiana was gone. He had slipped out quietly
as soon as he saw his friend safe in his father’s arms.

Tad ran down the stairs and looked up and down the street, but the
lanky figure was nowhere in sight. Distressed, he returned to his
father. “We must find him,” he said. “You’ve got to know Abe, because
he’s the best friend I ever had. Why, he saved my life!”

The young secretary, very crestfallen, came forward. “I--I think he
went toward the levee, sir,” said he.

“You should have asked him to wait,” the merchant answered curtly.
“We’ll go in search of him directly, Tad, my boy. But first come and
get some clothes on.”

They got into the carriage and were driven, despite the boy’s
protestations, to Mr. Hopkins’ hotel, where the clothes found in the
stateroom on the steamboat had been taken. In a few minutes Tad was
dressed once more in the garb of civilization.

“Now,” said he, “tell the coachman we want to go to the flatboat
moorings as fast as he can drive.”

Through the streets and along the levee they rumbled and drew up at
last where Tad pointed to the _Katy Roby_, tied up in the middle of the
swarming river-craft. But Abe and Allen were nowhere to be seen.

The stout Kentucky man sat on the rail of his boat, near the levee, and
spat judicially into the river before he answered Tad’s eager query.

“No,” said he, finally. “They ain’t here. They done picked up their
blankets an’ stuff an’ put out fer the steamboat landin’ some while
back. Said they was goin’ to go on the _Ohio Belle_ if they got thar
’fore she sailed.”

Hurriedly the Hopkinses, father and son, climbed back into the
carriage, and the coachman used his whip as they galloped toward the
smoky forest of steamboat stacks.

“She’s not gone yet,” cried Tad. “I can see her.”

But just then there came a long, deep whistle-blast, and one of the
great white steamers began to move slowly away from the levee side. The
carriage rolled up to the landing, and the coachman pulled the rearing
horses to a stop. As Tad jumped out he saw a tall, awkward youth in
homespun and deerskin waving to him from the forward rail of the upper
deck.

“Abe,” he cried, “wait! wait!”

“Come back!” shouted his father, “I want to give you the reward.” And
he held up a fat black wallet.

One of Abe’s quaint grins overspread his homely face. “No,” he called
back. “He was a good hand an’ earned his keep.”

Tad ran forward to the edge of the levee and cupped his hands about his
mouth. “Abe,” he yelled, “what’s your last name? I want to write to
you.”

“Lincoln,” the backwoods boy replied. “Jest send it to Gentryville.
They’ll see that I git it.”

Then with a clang of bells and a great splashing of foam as her paddles
beat the water, the _Ohio Belle_ swung out into the current and headed
upstream. And the last thing Tad saw was Abe picking up the little
bear, Poke, in his arms, and waving one of the cub’s black paws in a
comical good-by.




_other books by STEPHEN W. MEADER_

  THE BLACK BUCCANEER
  DOWN THE BIG RIVER
  LONGSHANKS
  RED HORSE HILL
  AWAY TO SEA
  KING OF THE HILLS
  LUMBERJACK
  THE WILL TO WIN AND OTHER STORIES
  WHO RIDES IN THE DARK?
  T-MODEL TOMMY
  BAT
  BOY WITH A PACK
  CLEAR FOR ACTION
  BLUEBERRY MOUNTAIN
  SHADOW IN THE PINES
  THE SEA SNAKE
  THE LONG TRAINS ROLL
  SKIPPY’S FAMILY
  JONATHAN GOES WEST
  BEHIND THE RANGES




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized or underlined text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

  Archaic or variant spelling has been retained.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LONGSHANKS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


