The Project Gutenberg eBook of Knitting
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Knitting
        how to knit and what to knit. With numerous illustrations

Editor: active 1883-1884 Marie Louise Kerzman

Release date: March 2, 2025 [eBook #75503]

Language: English

Original publication: Brooklyn: Henry Bristow, 1884

Credits: Aaron Adrignola, A Marshall and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KNITTING ***

  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




                              KNITTING:

                             HOW TO KNIT

                                 AND

                            WHAT TO KNIT.

                    _WITH NUMEROUS ILLUSTRATIONS._

                         COMPILED AND EDITED
                                  BY
                        MARIE LOUISE KERZMAN.


                             PUBLISHED BY
                            HENRY BRISTOW,
                           BROOKLYN, N. Y.




       Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1884,
                          BY HENRY BRISTOW,
    in the Office of the Librarian of Congress, Washington, D. C.




                            HOW TO KNIT.


The necessary materials for knitting are either cotton, worsted, silk
or thread, and knitting needles.

Stockings and all knitting worked in rounds require four knitting
needles, three of which are used for holding the stitches of the
work, and the fourth to knit with.

The casting on of stitches forms the beginning of knitting. It
consists of loops formed around a knitting needle. Every loop will
form a stitch. The number of stitches will determine the width of the
object which is to be knitted.

There are five different ways of casting on stitches. For the casting
on of stitches always unroll an end of the cotton long enough to work
the stitches required, as this end is used in the formation of those
stitches.

[Illustration: NO. 1. POSITION TO FORM THE FIRST CAST ON STITCH.]

No. 1.—Illustration No. 1 shows the position of the cotton, ready to
cast on the first stitch. Place the cotton over the thumb and first
finger of the left hand, in such a way as to have the end of cotton,
which must be sufficiently long for the required number of stitches,
fall from the thumb toward the palm of the hand. Hold this end and
the other part of the cotton with the remaining fingers of the left
hand. This same position of the cotton is used in illustrations 2 and
3. Take the needle with the right hand, place it over the cotton,
between the thumb and the first finger, pass it under the cotton
resting around the thumb, bring it upward; then pass the needle
downward, under the cotton resting on the first finger; pass this
loop through the loop around the thumb, withdraw the thumb from the
loop; pass the thumb under the end of the cotton, toward the palm of
the hand; draw this end in order to close the stitch just formed.

[Illustration: NO. 2. CASTING ON OF SINGLE STITCHES.]

No. 2—_Casting on of Single Stitches._—Begin in the same manner as
described in No. 1, and make 2 stitches. Then take up on the needle
the loop which is around the thumb (see illustration 2), without
withdrawing the thumb, insert the needle around the cotton marked _b_
in illustration No. 2, from right to left, and draw it through loop
_a_; close this stitch as already directed in No. 1, by withdrawing
the thumb from loop _a_ and drawing the end of cotton.


[Illustration: NO. 3. CASTING ON BY KNITTING.]

No. 3.—This casting on of stitches requires two needles. Form the
first stitch in same manner as described in No. 1. Then, with the
left hand, hold the needle on which this first stitch is formed, pass
the cotton over the first finger of the left hand, take a needle
with the right hand, and insert the point into the loop on the left
needle, wind the cotton around the point of the right needle, draw it
through the loop, *insert the point of the left needle into the loop
just formed on the right needle, wind the cotton around the point
of the right needle, draw it through the loop. Repeat from *. See
illustration 3.

[Illustration: NO. 4. NEW CASTING ON OF STITCHES.]

No. 4—_The Casting on of a New Row of Stitches._—This casting on
of stitches is generally employed in knitting with worsted, which
requires a new casting on of stitches in the progress of the work.
It is done by putting the worsted (see illustration No. 4) over the
thumb of the left hand, holding the end between the second and third
fingers, * take up the worsted around the thumb and lying toward the
palm of the hand, by inserting the needle from under the worsted in
an upward direction (see illustration No. 4), withdraw the thumb from
the loop, pass the thumb under the end of worsted resting in the
palm of the hand, and draw it to close the stitch. Repeat from *.


[Illustration: NO. 5. CASTING ON OF STITCHES LEAVING AN EDGE.]

No. 5.—The casting on of stitches illustrated in cut No. 5 forms
a narrow border after the first row has been knitted. In order to
easily knit the first row, the casting on of stitches must be done
on _a pair_ of knitting needles. Unroll an end long enough for the
required number of stitches. Double it. Fold this doubled end in
half, insert the point of the needles into the fold, place on the
first finger of the left hand the long end of the worsted which is
among the short ends. Place the three short ends over the thumb. Hold
all these ends with the second finger. Take on the needles the ends
resting on the thumb (marked _b_ in illustration), and insert them as
shown in illustration No. 5. Then pass the needles through the loop
on first finger, in the direction of the arrow, and pass this loop
through the loop already formed on the needles, withdraw the thumb,
close the stitch by drawing the three ends, which is done by passing
the thumb under them.

[Illustration: NO. 6. CASTING ON OF DOUBLE STITCHES.]

No. 6—_Double Casting on of Stitches._—The difference between this
method of casting on and the preceding is, that every knot forms,
each time, two loops instead of one, on the needle. The first knot
must be formed in the same manner as described in No. 5. In order
to work the second knot, insert once more the needle into the loop
of three ends which rest on the thumb, marked _a_ in illustration
No. 6. The arrow, in same illustration, shows where to insert the
needle and the direction it has to take. This done, insert the needle
downward into loop _b_, and draw the latter through loop resting on
the thumb, withdraw the thumb and close the knot. Every loop on the
needle must be knitted separately at the first row.




WHAT TO KNIT.


[Illustration: NO. 7. PLAIN KNITTING.]

Cut No. 7 illustrates plain knitting. This is the stitch generally
used in ordinary knitting. First, cast on the required number of
stitches in one of the ways already described. This done, take in the
left hand the needle on which are the loops, place the thread over
the first finger of the left hand, hold it with the second finger of
the same hand. Take the second needle with the right hand, insert its
point into the stitch, in an upward direction, and throw the thread
around the right hand needle, from right to left. Draw it through
the preceding loop and slip the left hand needle from its loop. Every
loop on the left hand needle is worked in the same manner.

When all the stitches have been worked from the left hand needle,
take that needle in the right hand and continue to work in same
manner.

[Illustration: NO. 8. PURLED KNITTING.]

To _Pearl_, _Purl_ or _Seam_, (meaning the same thing), is done by
holding with the left hand a needle on which a row of stitches has
been cast. Take a needle in the right hand, place the cotton over the
left hand needle and the first finger of the left hand, hold the end
with the second finger of the same hand. Insert the right hand needle
through the loop on the left hand needle, point right to left, in
such a manner as to have the cotton just under the right hand needle.
Pull this cotton through the loop, withdraw the left hand needle from
the loop, and the purled stitch is formed.

_How to Repair a Stitch which has been Half Knitted, or Dropped while
Knitting._—In knitting, one ought to be careful not to drop stitches
or to form half stitches. The latter happens when the thread thrown
over the right hand needle has not been pulled through the loop of
the left hand needle. To remedy this, while working the next round
or row, take the thread which has been thrown over the needle from
it, and pull it through the loop of the stitch. To repair a dropped
stitch, insert the left needle into the stitch, gather all the
threads on the right hand needle and pull them through the loop of
the stitch, one after the other.

_To Increase._—There are two ways to increase. The first is, to knit
both in the lower part of the stitch and also in the stitch itself.
The second way is to bring the cotton forward round the end of the
right needle, to the front; this forms a loop on the right needle
when the next stitch is knitted, and this extra loop is the made
stitch. It is preferable to increase after the first manner in plain
knitting, as this way of increasing is not so marked. The second
manner is used in fancy knitting, as it leaves a little opening after
the stitch is formed.

_To Slip a Stitch_ is to take a stitch off the left needle and to
_slip_ it on to the right needle without knitting.

With any work knitted in rows, it is necessary that the first stitch
of every row be worked as a slipped stitch. If it is a row of _purl_,
the first stitch must be slipped off as if it were plain knitting; if
it is a row of _plain_ knitting, slip the first stitch off as if it
were purl knitting.

_How to Narrow._—The usual way of narrowing is to knit two stitches
together, viz.: put the right needle through two of the loops on the
left needle, and knit them as one stitch. Another method is to slip
a stitch, knit one, and then with the left needle cast the slipped
stitch over the knitted stitch. When the narrowing is used to give a
certain shape to the work, it is well to employ the first method when
narrowing at the end of the round or row; and the second method when
narrowing at the beginning of it.

_Casting Off_ is done as follows: Knit two plain stitches, with the
left needle throw the first stitch over the second, knit a third
stitch, throw the second over the third, knit a fourth, throw the
third over the fourth, and so on until the last stitch is worked.
Pull the cotton through, and a knot is formed.

_The Joining of Ends_ in knitting ought never to be done by knotting
them together. It may be done so that no defect is visible on the
right side of the work, by lapping them three inches together, and
knitting five inches with doubled thread, leaving the ends on the
wrong side of the work. These ends can then be neatly darned into the
wrong side of the work.


LADY’S STOCKING.

To knit a stocking, attention must be given to the size of the
knitting needles, which ought to correspond with the number of the
material with which the stocking is to be knitted. It would be
difficult to give the exact number of stitches necessary for any
given size of stocking, as there is always a difference between the
knitting of different persons, since some knit loosely, others very
closely. It must be left to the judgment of the knitter to determine
the exact number of stitches required for the stocking to be knitted.

The following is the method of knitting a lady’s stocking with No.
300 knitting silk (or any other material of same size), with needles
to correspond.

This stocking is knitted, with a double border, as follows:

Cast on 152 stitches on 3 needles. After having cast on the last
stitch, close the round by knitting the _first_ stitch cast on.

Knit 16 rounds plain.

17th Round.—* Slip 1, knit 1, draw the slip stitch over the knitted
stitch, make 1; repeat from * to end of round.

18th to 34th Rounds, inclusive.—Knit plain.

Then fold in half the piece knitted, so that the 17th round will form
the edge of the border.

Pick up on other knitting needles the stitches of the 1st round, _i.
e._, the stitches cast on, and knit each of them with each stitch of
the 34th round. This finishes the border. Thus, the lower edge of the
border forms a fancy design of small scallops. Purl 3 rounds, knit
plain 3 rounds, purl 3 rounds.

Then knit plain until the leg of the stocking is twelve inches long.
In the first round of _this_ plain knitting begin the seam stitch,
which ought to correspond with the last and first stitches cast on.
This seam stitch is repeated in every third round.

After the twelve inches have been knitted, narrow in the following
round 1 stitch on each side of the seam. Knit 8 rounds. Narrow 1
stitch on each side of seam. Knit 7 rounds. Narrow, in manner already
described. Knit 6 rounds. Narrow. Knit 5 rounds. * Narrow. Knit 4
rounds. Repeat 20 times from * until 110 stitches and the 2 seam
stitches are left on the needles. This done, knit plain 30 rounds.
The knitting of the heel now begins. Divide the stitches by putting
on 1 needle the 2 seam stitches and 28 stitches on each side of them.
Thus, there will be upon this needle 58 stitches. Knit this needle,
backward and forward, in _rows_, making the seam stitches as usual.

When knitting backward, purl _all_ these stitches. When knitting
forward, knit plain all the stitches with exception of the seam
stitch, which must be purled. Always slip the first knitted stitch.
Continue knitting until the flap is 44 rows long, counting each time
across as 1 row.

1st Row.—Now purl from the left hand side the 28 stitches and the 2
seam stitches. Purl 2, knit 2 together, purl 1. Turn.

2d Row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, 2 purl (seam stitches), 2 plain, knit 2
together, 1 plain. Turn.

3d Row.—Slip 1, purl 8 (including seam stitches), purl 2 together,
purl 1. Turn.

4th Row.—Slip 1, 4 plain, 2 purl (seam stitches), 3 plain, knit 2
together, 1 plain. Turn.

5th Row.—Slip 1, purl 10 (seam stitch included), purl 2 together,
purl 1. Turn.

Continue to knit in this wise until the remaining stitches are
gradually worked off. Then pick up the side stitches of this flap,
which amount to 36 on each side, and the heel is formed.

Knit the side stitches of the flap, “making 1” now and then, so as to
make the number of stitches on each side of the heel amount to 40.

Knit again in rounds. After every 2 rounds purl the first 2 stitches
together, then the last 2 stitches together, of the heel stitches.
Narrow in this manner 12 times. This done, the number of stitches in
the whole round is reduced to 110, _i. e._, to the original number
before the beginning of the heel. Knit plain 50 rounds. Commence
narrowing of toe as follows: * knit 2 together, knit 8 plain. Repeat
from * to end of round. Knit 8 rounds plain. * Knit 2 together, knit
7 plain. Repeat from * to end of round. Knit 7 rounds plain. Knit 2
together, knit 6 plain, knit 2 together, 6 plain, etc., to end of
round.

Knit 6 rounds plain; knit 2 together, 5 plain, 2 together, 5 plain,
etc., to end of round.

Knit 5 rounds plain; knit 2 together, 4 plain, 2 together, 4 plain,
etc., to end of round.

Knit 4 rounds plain; knit 2 together, 3 plain, 2 together, 3 plain,
etc., to end of round.

Knit 3 rounds plain; knit 2 together, 2 plain, 2 together, 2 plain,
etc., to end of round.

Knit 2 rounds plain; knit 2 together, 1 plain, 2 together, 1 plain,
etc., to end of round.

Knit 1 round plain.

11 stitches now remain. By means of a darning needle, slip these
stitches upon the silk thread with which the knitting is done. Pass
this silk once more through the stitches, then draw all the stitches
together, by pulling the silk thread. Fasten the thread on the wrong
side of the stocking.


HEELS OF STOCKINGS.

There are three other ways of knitting a stocking-heel, as
illustrations 9, 10 and 11 show. In the directions for knitting these
heels, the same number of stitches is taken as in the directions for
knitting the heel of “lady’s stocking,” _i. e._, 28 stitches on each
side of the 2 seam stitches, thus leaving 54 for the front of the
foot.

[Illustration: NO. 9. HEEL OF A STOCKING.]

_Heel No. 9._—Knit 44 rows backward (purling) and forward (plain).
While knitting these rows, make a seam stitch on each side of the
flap. These 2 seams must correspond with the seam in the center of
the flap. See illustration No. 9.

When the 44 rows have been knitted, the rounding of the heel
begins. Knit from right hand side 19 stitches (including the side
seam stitch), knit 2 together, knit 14 plain (center seam stitch
inclusive), slip 1, knit 1 plain, draw the slip stitch over the 1
plain. Knit 5 plain. Turn. Slip 1, purl 25. Turn. Slip 1, knit 3
plain, knit 2 together, knit 14 plain, slip 1, knit 1 plain, draw the
slip stitch over the 1 plain, knit 5 plain. Turn. Slip 1, purl 25.

Continue working thus to the end of cap, alternating every time
each row in same manner as described. When the heel is finished, 26
stitches must remain on the needle.

[Illustration: NO. 10. HEEL.]

_Heel No. 10._—This heel is knitted partly in rounds with the front
of the foot, and partly by itself in rows. Divide the stitches evenly
on 4 needles, and knit in rounds with a fifth needle. After every
2 rounds “make 1,” just before knitting the first of the stitches
belonging to the heel, and “make 1” after having knitted them. Repeat
this 13 times.

This done, begin the cap of the heel. Put on a special needle the 12
middle stitches (6 on each side of the seam stitch), and knit these
in _rows_, forward and backward, until 16 rows have been worked.
Narrow at the end of each of these rows, in knitting the last stitch
of the row together with the first of the remaining stitches on the
next needle, then knit the following stitch and turn.

Knit 16 rows more without narrowing, but at the end of each row knit
1 of the stitches remaining on the next needle, and then turn to knit
the following row.

When this is done, continue to knit in rows, and narrow again at the
end of each row by knitting the last stitch of each row together with
one of the remaining stitches on the next needle; then turn and knit
the following row. When the remaining stitches have all been narrowed
into the heel, then begin to knit the foot in rounds.

[Illustration: NO. 11. HEEL.]

_Heel No. 11._—To work this heel, knit a flap of a good length in
rows, backward and forward. Then put on a special needle the 22
stitches in the center, 11 on each side of the seam stitch, and knit
these in rows, backward and forward. In every _plain_ row knit the
4th and 5th stitches together, and then the 19th and 20th stitches
together. At the end of _every row_ knit 1 of the remaining stitches.
When all these remaining stitches have been worked, then pick up the
side stitches of the flap, and the heel is finished.


HOW TO KNIT THE TOE OF A STOCKING.

[Illustration: NO. 12. TOE.]

No. 12.—This toe is worked as follows: Narrow after every 7 stitches,
in the first round to be narrowed. Then knit 7 rounds plain. Narrow
in the following round after every 6 stitches. Knit 6 rounds plain.
Narrow in the next round after every 5 stitches. Knit 5 rounds plain.
Continue working in such manner, always knitting 1 stitch less
between the narrowings in every new round which is to be narrowed,
and always knitting after every round narrowed the same number of
plain rounds as the number of stitches knitted between the narrowings
of this last round narrowed.

[Illustration: NO. 13. TOE.]

No. 13.—Before beginning to decrease this toe, divide the stitches
evenly on 4 needles. Then narrow at the beginning of every needle;
slip the first stitch, knit the next one, and draw the slipped stitch
over the knitted one. After _each_ of the first 4 narrowed rounds
knit 4 rounds plain. After _each_ of the next 4 narrowed rounds knit
3 rounds plain. After _each_ of the following 4 narrowed rounds knit
2 rounds plain, and after _each_ of the following 4 narrowed rounds
knit 1 round plain. Then continue to narrow at the beginning of every
needle to end of toe.

[Illustration: NO. 14. TOE.]

No. 14.—The narrowing of this toe is done as follows: Divide equally
on 4 needles the number of stitches. Then begin the first round of
narrowing by purling 2 together at the beginning of every needle.
This round is followed by 4 rounds plain. In all the narrowing
rounds that follow the first one, decrease once on each side of
the preceding narrowing. After every narrowed round knit 4 rounds
plain. Knit in all, 11 narrowing rounds. Then finish off the toe
by narrowing only once at the end of _each_ needle, by slipping 1
stitch, knitting the next, and drawing the slipped stitch over the
knitted one.


TO RENEW THE HEEL AND SOLE OF STOCKINGS KNITTED BY HAND.

[Illustration: NO. 15. POSITION OF NEEDLES TO RENEW A STOCKING HEEL.]

[Illustration: NO. 16. THE FASTENING OF THE NEW HEEL.]

Illustrations 15 to 18 show the manner of doing this. To renew the
heel of a stocking, first remove the damaged heel by cutting along
the sides of the heel, at the end of the cap and at the beginning of
the heel. Make even the stitches belonging to the parts from which
the heel has just been cut. Take up these stitches on 5 needles,
as illustrated in cut No. 15. Take up on 2 needles the stitches
belonging to the heel. Then take up the side stitches (each side) on
1 needle. The remaining stitches belong to the fifth needle, that is,
those which will serve for the joining of the cap of the heel. Then,
with the stitches belonging to the heel, begin to knit the heel in
rows, to and fro. But, at the end of every plain row, always knit the
last stitch of the row together (plain) with the next stitch on the
side needle. The same must be done at the end of every purled row,
only the last stitch with the next stitch on the side needle have to
be _purled_ together, instead of knitted plain. When the heel has
reached the required length, then begin to knit the cap of the heel
in the usual way, until the number of stitches corresponds to the
number of stitches of the fifth needle. Join these 2 rows of stitches
together, as illustrated in cut No. 16. This is done by darning. Take
an end of the cotton long enough for this purpose, and pass it, by
means of a darning needle, downward through the last stitch of the
stocking, and through the first one of the stitches on the fifth
needle, or upper row. Then pass it through the next 2 corresponding
stitches of the cap of the heel. See illustration No. 17, which shows
the needle inserted in the 2 stitches through which the cotton is to
be drawn. Pass the needle through the next 2 corresponding stitches
of the upper row, in the same direction as is shown by the arrow in
illustration No. 17. From there * pass it through the last stitch,
already worked, of the lower row, and through next stitch; then
through the next 2 corresponding stitches of the upper row. Slip
every time the stitch from the knitting needle after having passed
the cotton through them. Repeat from * until all the stitches of
the 2 rows are joined to each other. When this is done, fasten the
cotton on the wrong side of the stocking by drawing it through a few
stitches.

[Illustration: NO. 17. STITCH FOR THE FASTENING OF A NEW HEEL.]

Illustration No. 17 represents only a part of the joining, where the
stitches are worked very loosely, in order that it might be copied
more easily. Yet, while working, the stitches of the joining must
be drawn to the same size as the knitted stitches of the stocking,
and in such a manner that the joining cannot be detected from the
knitting.

[Illustration: NO. 18. RE-SOLING THE FOOT OF A STOCKING.]

No. 18—_How to Re-sole the Foot of a Stocking_.—In order to do
this, a new heel must first be knitted to the stocking in the usual
way. When this is done, pick up the side stitches of the heel and
begin to knit the sole in _rows_, to and fro, 1 row plain, the other
purled. At the end of every plain row pick up the last stitch of the
_corresponding_ row of the old sole, and knit it together, plain,
with the last stitch of row just knitted. The same thing must be done
at the end of every purled row, only purl the 2 stitches together
instead of knitting them plain together. Always slip, plain, the
first stitch of every row.

The narrowing of the sole, on both sides, must be done just before
knitting together the last stitch of the row and the last stitch of
the corresponding row of the old sole.

After the new sole has been knitted, turn the stocking on the wrong
side; cut off the old sole along both sides, yet leaving a strip of
4 stitches in width on each side. Lay each strip towards the front
part of the foot. Unravel them. Smooth down the ends formed by the
unraveling, and fasten them to the stocking by darning over them
lightly, so that this darning might not be seen on the right side of
the stocking. Should the stocking require a new toe to be knitted on,
then unravel the old one, pick up the stitches and knit a new toe in
rounds, in one of the ways already described in the book.


HOW TO DARN STOCKINGS.

The darning of a stocking can be done in different ways. The way most
generally adopted is that of cross-work darning, which looks very
well when neatly worked. But the darning in imitation of the knitted
stitch, although more tedious, is preferable; for, when it is well
worked, it cannot be told from the knitting, except on the wrong side.

[Illustration: NO. 19. CROSS-WORK DARNING.]

No. 19—_Cross-Work Darning_.—Trim neatly the place which is to be
darned, then work a foundation of threads length-wise across the
opening, as is shown in illustration No. 19. This done, begin to darn
across this foundation, in rows, to and fro, by taking up every other
thread of the foundation. In every following row take up the thread
which was not taken up in the preceding row. See illustration No.
19. The darning must be prolonged to a little distance on each side
of the original opening.

[Illustration: NO. 20. DARNING IN IMITATION OF KNITTED STITCH.]

No. 20—_To Imitate the Knitted Stitch in Darning_.—This work requires
careful preparation. Loosen the damaged part, above and below it,
in the width, in such a way that there will remain 2 even rows of
perfect loose stitches. The first and last stitches of the upper
row must correspond to those of the lower row. Cut the damaged
part through the middle. Fold each half back upon the inside of
the stocking, where it will have to be trimmed and fastened. Work
a foundation of threads across the opening, width-wise, inserting
each thread into the second stitch from the edge of the opening, and
making it correspond with every knitted row. See illustration No. 20.

Then work on this foundation as follows: Place the darning cotton
at the left, pass the darning needle downward under the lowest of
the threads of foundation, and pull gently the darning cotton, so
as to form the half of a stitch. Work in same manner on the other
foundation threads. After making the half stitch upon the top thread
of foundation, pass the needle through the nearest upper stitch of
the stocking. Turn the work. Place the darning cotton towards the
right. Pass the needle downward, under the top thread of foundation,
draw the cotton lightly, and in this way the first whole stitch will
be formed. Continue to work in same manner on the foundation threads,
until the entire work is done.

Illustrations 21 to 23 show a different way of imitating the knitted
plain stitch in darning.

[Illustration: NO. 21. FOUNDATION FOR NO. 22.]

To darn after this method, remove the damaged part and prepare the
opening for foundation threads in same manner as already described
in preceding number. Take for foundation thread a cotton finer than
the one with which the darning stitches have to be worked. Work the
foundation threads _length-wise_ on the wrong side of the stocking,
as shown in illustration No. 21. This done, turn the stocking on the
right side and begin the darning in imitation of the knitted stitch.
Work width-wise, as follows:

Pass the darning needle through the upper 2 stitches, as shown in
illustration No. 22, then pass it, in the direction of the arrow,
under the next 2 threads of foundation. Insert the needle into the
last stitch, through which it has already passed, and pass it through
the stitch next to it. Then pass it under the next 2 corresponding
threads of foundation. Continue working in like manner. When the end
of the row is reached, work in same stitch over the next 3 stitches
of the knitting.

[Illustration: NO. 22. FORMATION OF THE DARNING STITCHES ON
FOUNDATION NO. 21.]

After working over the third stitch, insert the needle downward—along
the part which is not yet darned—into the upper part of that
third stitch, take up the cross bar of the stitch and draw the
cotton through. Then turn the work from left to right and begin
the next row. When the work has come down to the lower edge of
the opening, work the last row in the usual way; but, instead of
passing the needle under the foundation threads, pass it through the
corresponding stitches of this edge, as is shown in illustration No.
23.

When the darning is done, withdraw carefully the foundation threads.
Trim the damaged part on the wrong side of the stocking, and fasten
it neatly, as already stated in directions No. 20.

[Illustration: NO. 23. FINISHING OFF.]


BORDERS FOR STOCKINGS.

[Illustration: NO. 24. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 24.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 7. The first 5
rounds knit plain.

6th round.—Make 1, knit 2 together, plain, alternately to end of
round.

7th to 11th rounds.—Alternate 1 purl, 1 plain.

12th round.—Pick up on other knitting needles the stitches of the
first round (the stitches cast on) and knit each of them with each
stitch of the 11th round.

13th, 14th and 15th rounds.—Purl.

16th round.—* Make 1, purl 2 together, 5 plain. Repeat from * to end
of round.

17th round.—Knit plain.

18th round.—* Make 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, 4 plain. Repeat from
*.

19th round.—Knit plain.

20th round.—* Make 1, 2 plain, purl 2 together, 3 plain. Repeat from
*.

21st round.—Knit plain.

22d round.—* Make 1, 3 plain, purl 2 together, 2 plain. Repeat from *.

23d round.—Knit plain.

24th round.—* Make 1, 4 plain, purl 2 together, 1 plain. Repeat from
*.

25th round.—Knit plain.

26th round.—* Make 1, 5 plain, purl 2 together. Repeat from *.

27th round.—Knit plain.

28th round.—* 2 plain, purl 2 together, make 1, 3 plain. Repeat from
*.

29th round.—Knit plain.

30th round.—* 1 plain, purl 2 together, 1 plain, make 1, 3 plain.
Repeat from *.

31st round.—Knit plain.

32d round.—* Purl 2 together, 2 plain, make 1, 3 plain. Repeat from
*.

33d round.—Knit plain.

In rounds 34, 36 and 38, slip 1 stitch of the last needle upon the
first needle, and purl that stitch with the following stitch together.

34th round.—* Purl 2 together, 3 plain, make 1, 2 plain. Repeat from
*.

35th round.—Knit plain.

36th round.—* Purl 2 together, 4 plain, make 1, 1 plain. Repeat from
*.

37th round.—Knit plain.

38th round.—* Purl 2 together, 5 plain, make 1. Repeat from *.

[Illustration: NO. 25. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

For Border No. 25 cast on a number of stitches divisible by 8. Knit 8
rounds plain.

9th round.—* Slip 1, 1 plain, draw the slipped stitch over the 1
plain, make 1. Repeat from * to end of round.

10th to 17th rounds.—Knit plain.

18th round.—Pick up on other needles the stitches of the first round
(that is, the stitches cast on) and knit each of them with each
stitch of the 17th round. Then begin the design.

1st round.—* Purl 2, make 1, 4 plain, knit 2 together, plain. Repeat
from * to end of round.

2d round.—* Purl 2, 1 plain, make 1, 3 plain, knit 2 together, plain.
Repeat from *.

3d round.—* Purl 2, 2 plain, make 1, 2 plain, knit 2 together, plain.
Repeat from *.

4th round.—* Purl 2, 3 plain, make 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together,
plain. Repeat from *.

5th round.—* Purl 2, 4 plain, make 1, knit 2 together, plain. Repeat
from *.

Repeat this design twice and then work the following 2 rounds like
the 9th and 10th rounds, already described.

[Illustration: NO. 26. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

Border No. 26.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 8. Knit the
lower edge of the design as described in preceding number. Then work
the design as follows:

1st round.—* Purl 3, make 1, knit 2 together, plain, 3 plain. Repeat
from *.

2d round.—* Purl 3, make 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together, plain, 2 plain.
Repeat from *.

3d round.—* Purl 3, make 1, 2 plain, knit 2 together, plain, 1 plain.
Repeat from *.

4th round.—* 3 Purl, make 1, 3 plain, knit 2 together, plain. Repeat
from *.

5th round.—* Purl 3, 3 plain, knit 2 together, plain, make 1. Repeat
from *.

6th round.—* Purl 3, 2 plain, knit 2 together, plain, 1 plain, make
1. Repeat from *.

7th round.—* Purl 3, 1 plain, knit 2 together, plain, 2 plain, make
1. Repeat from *.

8th round.—* Purl 3, knit 2 together, plain, 3 plain, make 1. Repeat
from *.

Repeat this design until the desired breadth of border is reached.

[Illustration: NO. 27. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 27.—The lower edge of this border is scalloped and worked as
follows:

Cast on the number of stitches required for the stocking.

Knit 4 rounds plain.

5th round.—* Make 1, knit 2 together, plain. Repeat from * to end of
round.

Knit plain the next 4 rounds.

Then pick up on other needles the stitches of the first round (that
is, the stitches cast on) and knit each of these stitches with each
of the stitches of the ninth round. Begin the design.

1st round.—* Make 1, 1 twist stitch (knitted from the back), knit 2
together in twist stitch, purl 1. Repeat from *.

2d round.—* 3 plain—the first of the 3 is formed from the newly made
stitch in the last round—purl 1. Repeat from * to end of round.

The design consists of these 2 rounds, which are alternately repeated
until the border has reached its desired breadth. Finish the border
with 2 rounds of purled stitches.

[Illustration: NO. 28. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 28.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 13.

1st round.—1 twist stitch, purl 1, 1 twist stitch, purl 3. In the
following 4 stitches the 1st and 4th must be crossed by knitting
first the 4th stitch plain, so that it will lay over the 1st one;
then, purl the 2d and 3d; knit the 1st stitch plain. This done, purl
3. Repeat from *.

2d round.—* 1 twist stitch, 1 plain, 1 twist stitch, 3 purl, 1 plain,
2 purl, 1 plain, 3 purl. Repeat from *. Knit 4 rounds more like this
second round; but from now on the 1 plain worked between the 2 twist
stitches must, in 1 round, alternate with 1 plain, and in the other
with 1 purl.

Then repeat again from 1st round.

[Illustration: NO. 29. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 29.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 7.

1st round.—* 5 purl, make 1, purl 2 together. Repeat from *.

2d to 7th rounds.—* 6 purl, 1 plain. Repeat from *. The 1 plain in
the second round is formed by knitting plain the 1 made stitch of the
first round.

Repeat so that every other design will correspond. See illustration
No. 29.

[Illustration: NO. 30. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 30.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 21. Knit in rounds
as follows:

1st round.—* Make 1, 1 twist stitch. Alternate 5 times: 3 purl, 1
twist stitch. Repeat from *.

2d round.—* 1 plain. Alternate 5 times: 1 twist stitch, 3 purl. Then
work 1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

3d round.—* Make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 1 twist stitch. Alternate 5
times: 3 purl, 1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

4th round.—* 3 plain. Alternate 5 times: 1 twist stitch, 1 purl,
narrow (_i. e._, purl 2 together). Then work 1 twist stitch. Repeat
from *.

5th round.—* Make 1, 1 plain, make 1, narrow plain, make 1, 1 twist
stitch. Alternate 5 times: 2 purl, 1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

6th round.—* 5 plain. Alternate 5 times: 1 twist stitch, 2 purl. Then
1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

7th round.—* Make 1, narrow, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, narrow, make
1, 1 twist stitch. Alternate 5 times: narrow, 1 twist stitch. Repeat
from *.

8th round.—* 7 plain. Alternate 5 times: 1 twist stitch, 1 purl. Then
1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

9th round.—* Make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 1 plain, make 1,
narrow, make 1, 1 twist stitch. Alternate 5 times: 1 purl, 1 twist
stitch. Repeat from *.

10th round.—* 9 plain. Alternate 5 times: 1 twist stitch, 1 purl.
Then 1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

11th round.—* Make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1,
1 plain stitch, make 1, narrow, make 1, 1 twist stitch. Alternate 5
times: 1 purl, 1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

12th round.—* 11 plain. Alternate 5 times: 1 twist stitch, 1 purl.
Then work 1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

13th round.—* Make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 1 plain, make
1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 1 twist stitch.
Alternate 5 times: 1 purl, 1 twist stitch. Repeat from *.

14th round.—* 13 plain, 1 twist stitch. Narrow 5 times in twist
stitch. Repeat from *.

15th round.—* Alternate 3 times: make 1, narrow. Then make 1, 1
plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, narrow. Then make 1, 6 twist
stitches. Repeat from *.

16th round.—15 plain. Knit on a special needle the following 6
stitches, then wind the cotton 4 times, just below, around the 6
stitches just knitted. Slip the 6 stitches on the working needle.
Knit plain the next 15 stitches, etc.

Repeat the design from first round, but in such a manner as to form
pattern shown in illustration No. 30.

[Illustration: NO. 31. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 31.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 5. Knit plain the
first 5 rounds.

6th round.—* Make 2, narrow 2 stitches. Repeat from *.

7th round.—* With the 2 made stitches of last round alternate 1
plain, 1 purl. Work 1 plain. Repeat from *.

8th to 11th rounds.—Alternate to end of round, 2 purl, 1 plain.

12th round.—Pick up on special needles the stitches of 1st round (_i.
e._, the stitches cast on), and knit each of them with each stitch of
the 11th round.

13th round.—Make 1, knit 2 together, plain, alternately to end of
round.

14th round.—Knit plain.

15th and 16th rounds.—Purl.

17th round.—Knit plain.

18th round.—* 3 purl, knit 2 together, plain, make 1. Repeat from *.

19th to 21st rounds.—3 purl, 2 plain, alternately to end of round.

22d round.—* 3 purl, make 1, narrow. Repeat from *.

23d to 25th rounds.—* 3 purl, 2 plain. Repeat from *.

Repeat from 18th to 25th rounds, inclusive, until the required
breadth of border is reached.

[Illustration: NO. 32. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 32.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 9.

1st to 3d rounds.—Purl.

4th round.—* 2 plain, purl 2 together twice, 2 plain, make 1, 1
plain, make 1. Repeat from *.

5th round.—* 2 plain, 2 purl, 5 plain. Repeat from *.

Alternate 12 times the 4th and 5th rounds.

[Illustration: NO. 33. BORDER FOR STOCKING.]

No. 33.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 8.

1st round.—* 8 plain, make 1 plain by knitting the thread connecting
the 8th and 9th stitches. Repeat from * to end of round.

2d and 3d rounds.—* 8 plain, slip 1 stitch, viz.: the stitch which
has been formed from the thread connecting the 8th and 9th stitches
of last round. Repeat from *.

4th round.—* Knit 2 together, plain, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1,
knit 2 together, make 1, knit 2 together, make 1, knit 1 plain, viz.:
the stitch which was slipped in the 2 last rounds. Repeat from *.

5th to 7th rounds.—8 purl, 1 plain, alternately to end of round.

Repeat the design from 1st to 7th rounds, inclusive; but, instead of
making in the 1st round 1 plain by knitting the connecting thread,
slip the stitch coming after the 8 plain.


FANCY DESIGNS FOR KNITTING.

[Illustration: NO. 34. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 34.—This design is worked on 2 needles, in rows, to and fro. Cast
on 27 stitches.

1st row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow (_i. e._, knit 2
together, plain), make 1, 3 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain, narrow, 1 purl,
narrow, 2 plain, 1 purl, 3 plain, make 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 1
plain.

2d row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 4 purl, 1 plain, 3
purl, 1 plain, 3 purl, 1 plain, 4 purl, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 1
plain.

3d row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 1 plain, make
1, narrow, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, narrow, 1 purl, narrow, 1 plain,
1 purl, 1 plain, narrow, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 plain, make 1,
narrow, 1 plain.

4th row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 5 purl, 1 plain, 2
purl, 1 plain, 2 purl, 1 plain, 5 purl, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 1
plain.

5th row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 3 plain,
make 1, narrow, 1 purl, narrow, 1 purl, narrow, 1 purl, narrow, make
1, 3 plain, make 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

6th row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 6 purl, 1 plain, 1
purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 6 purl, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 1
plain.

7th row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 5 plain,
make 1, knit 3 together, 1 purl, knit 3 together, make 1, 5 plain,
make 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

8th row.—1 slip stitch, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 8 purl, 1 plain, 8
purl, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

Repeat the design from 1st to 8th rows, inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 35. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 35.—1st row.—Knit plain.

2d row.—* 2 purl, knit 2 together, plain, in twist stitch, make 1.
Repeat from *.

3d row.—Knit plain.

4th row.—* 2 purl, make 1, knit 2 together, plain, in twist stitch.

[Illustration: NO. 36. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 36.—For this design cast on the number of stitches required for
the length of the work. Knit in rows, as follows:

1st row.—Plain.

2d row.—* Knit 3 together, plain, make 3 (_i. e._, knit in the next
stitch 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain). Repeat from *.

3d row.—Knit plain.

4th row.—* Make 3 (_i. e._, knit in next stitch 1 plain, 1 purl, 1
plain), knit 3 together, plain. Repeat from *.

Then begin again from 1st row.

[Illustration: NO. 37. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 37.—1st row.—* 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together, plain. Repeat
from *.

2d row.—* Make 1, knit 2 together, plain (_i. e._, knit together the
next stitch and the made stitch of last row), 1 purl.

[Illustration: NO. 38. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 38.—This pretty design is worked in rows, to and fro, as follows:

1st to 3d rows.—3 plain, 3 purl, alternately to end of row.

4th row.—* 3 purl, make 1, knit 3 together, plain, make 1. Repeat
from *.

Then repeat again from 1st row.

[Illustration: NO. 39. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 39.—Cast on the required number of stitches, and knit in plain
and purled rows as follows:

1st row.—Slip 1 stitch, * knit 3 together, plain, make 1. Repeat from
*.

2d row.—Purl; but, in every new made stitch of last row, knit 1
purl, 1 plain, 1 purl.

3d row.—Knit plain.

4th row.—Purl.

Repeat the design from 1st row, but in such a way as to make the
designs alternate, as in illustration No. 39.

[Illustration: NO. 40. BORDER.]

No. 40.—Cast on (as described in No. 5) a number of stitches
divisible by 10. Purl 2 rounds, knit 1 round plain. Begin the design
as follows:

1st round.—* 1 plain, make 1, 1 slip stitch, 1 plain, draw the
slipped stitch over the 1 plain, 5 purl, knit 2 together, plain, make
1. Repeat from *.

2d round.—* 3 plain, 5 purl, 2 plain. Repeat from *.

3d round.—* 1 plain, make 1, 1 plain, slip 1, 1 plain, draw slipped
stitch over one plain, 3 purl, 2 together, plain, 1 plain, make 1,
repeat from *.

4th round.—* 4 plain, 3 purl, 3 plain. Repeat from *.

5th round.—* 1 plain, make 1, 2 plain, slip 1, 1 plain, draw the
slipped stitch over the 1 plain, 1 purl, 2 together, plain, 2 plain,
make 1. Repeat from *.

6th round.—* 5 plain, 1 purl, 4 plain. Repeat from *.

7th round.—* 1 plain, make 1, 3 plain, slip 1, 2 together, plain,
draw the slipped stitch over the 2 together, plain, 3 plain, make 1.
Repeat from *.

8th round.—Knit plain.

9th round.—* 3 purl, 2 together, plain, make 1, 1 plain, make 1,
slip 1, 1 plain, draw the slipped stitch over the 1 plain, 2 purl.
Repeat from *.

10th round.—* 3 purl, 5 plain, 2 purl. Repeat from *.

11th round.—* 2 purl, 2 together, plain, 1 plain, make 1, 1 plain,
make 1, 1 plain, slip 1, 1 plain, draw the slipped stitch over the 1
plain, 1 purl. Repeat from *.

12th round.—* 2 purl, 7 plain, 1 purl. Repeat from *.

13th round.—* 1 purl, 2 together, plain, 2 plain, make 1, 1 plain,
make 1, 2 plain, slip 1, 1 plain, draw the slipped stitch over the 1
plain. Repeat from *.

14th round.—* 1 purl, 9 plain. Repeat from *.

15th round.—Knit 2 together, plain, * 3 plain, make 1, 1 plain, make
1, 3 plain, slip 1, 2 together, plain, draw the slipped stitch over
the 2 together, plain. Repeat from *. At the end of the round draw
the last stitch over the first stitch.

16th round.—Knit plain.

[Illustration: NO. 41. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 41.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 8 and knit in rows,
to and fro, as follows:

1st row.—* Make 1, purl 2 together, 3 purl, purl 2 together, make 1,
1 purl. Repeat from *.

2d row.—Make 1, 2 plain, * make 1, slip 1, 1 plain, draw the slipped
stitch over the 1 plain, 1 plain, knit 2 together, plain, make 1, 3
plain. Repeat from *. Make only 1 plain instead of 3 plain at the end
of row.

3d row.—2 purl, * make 1, purl 3 together, make 1, 5 purl. Repeat
from *. Purl only 4 instead of 5 at the end of row.

4th row.—* 3 plain, knit 2 together, plain, make 1, 1 plain, make 1,
knit 2 together, plain. Repeat from *. Make 1 plain after knitting
the 2 together, plain, at the end of row.

5th row.—2 purl, * make 1, 3 purl, make 1, purl 2 together, 1 purl,
purl 2 together. Repeat from *. At the end of row purl only 1 instead
of purling the last 2 stitches together.

6th row.—* Slip 1, knit 2 together, plain, draw the slipped stitch
over the 2 together, plain, make 1, 5 plain, make 1. Repeat from *.
After the last make 1, knit 2 together, plain, at the end of row.

7th row.—* 1 purl, make 1, purl 2 together, 3 purl, purl 2 together,
make 1. Repeat from *. After the last make 1 at the end of row make 1
purl.

8th row.—2 plain, * make 1, slip 1, 1 plain, draw the slipped stitch
over the 1 plain, 1 plain, knit 2 together, plain, make 1, 3 plain.
Repeat from *. Knit only 2 plain instead of 3 plain at the end of the
row.


SQUARES FOR BED SPREAD.

[Illustration: NO. 42. SQUARE FOR BED SPREAD.]

Nos. 42 and 43.—Cut No. 43 illustrates four of square No. 42 put
together. No. 42 is worked with fine or coarse cotton in rounds.

Cast on 4 needles 8 stitches, and knit with help of a fifth needle as
follows:

1st round.—Purl.

2d round.—* Make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 1 plain. Repeat from * to end of
round.

3d round.—Purl.

4th round.—* Make 1. Knit in the next stitch 1 plain, 1 purl. Make 1,
3 plain. Repeat from *.

5th round.—* 1 plain, 2 purl, 1 plain, 3 purl. Repeat from *.

6th round.—* Make 1, 1 plain, 2 purl, 1 plain, make 1, 3 plain.
Repeat from *.

7th round.—* 2 plain, 2 purl, 2 plain, 3 purl. Repeat from *.

8th round.—* Make 1, 2 plain, 2 purl, 2 plain, make 1, 3 plain.
Repeat from *.

9th round.—* 1 purl, 2 plain, 2 purl, 2 plain, 4 purl. Repeat from *.

10th round.—* Make 1, 1 purl, 2 plain, 2 purl, 2 plain, 1 purl, make
1, 3 plain. Repeat from *.

11th round.—* 2 purl, 2 plain, 2 purl, 2 plain, 5 purl. Repeat from *.

[Illustration: No. 43. SQUARE FOR BED SPREAD.

To go with No. 42.]

Work 16 more rounds in same manner as described in 2 last rounds,
until, in the 27th round, there will be 29 stitches on each needle.

28th round.—* Alternate 13 times: Make 1, knit 2 together, plain.
Then make 1, 3 plain. Repeat from *.

29th round.—Purl.

Then cast off the stitches. Join the squares as illustrated in cut
No. 43.

[Illustration: NO. 44. SQUARE FOR BED SPREAD.]

No. 44—_Square for Bed Spread_.—This square is knitted with white
cotton, on 2 steel knitting needles, in rows, to and fro. Begin to
knit at the corner of the square (see lowest corner in illustration
44). Cast on 3 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1. Knit in next stitch 1 purl, 1 plain. Purl 1.

2d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Knit in next stitch 1 purl and 1 plain. 1
plain.

3d row.—Slip 1, purl 2. Knit in next stitch 1 purl and 1 plain. Purl
1.

4th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 3 plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 1 plain. 3 purl.

6th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 1 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 3 plain, 3 purl.

8th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 3 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 5 plain, 3 purl.

10th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 5 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

11th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 7 plain, 3 purl.

12th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 7 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 1 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

14th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 1 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3
plain.

15th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

16th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 3 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3
plain.

17th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

18th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 5 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3
plain.

19th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 3
purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

20th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 3 plain, 3 purl, 3 plain,
4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

21st row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 4
purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

22d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, 4 plain, 4
purl, make 1, 3 plain.

23d row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 5
purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

24th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 5 plain, 7 purl, 5 plain,
4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

25th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 6 purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 2 plain, 6
purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

26th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 6 plain, 5 purl, 6 plain,
4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

27th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 7 purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 1 plain, 7
purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

28th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 7 plain, 3 purl, 7 plain,
4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

29th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 4
purl, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over
them, 4 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 3 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

30th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 3 plain, 3 purl, 9 plain,
3 purl, 3 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

31st row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 9
purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

32d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, 9 plain, 5
purl, 4 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

33d row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 9
purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 5 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

34th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 5 plain, 7 purl, 9 plain,
7 purl, 5 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

35th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 6 purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 2 plain, 9
purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped
stitch over them, 2 plain, 6 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

36th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 6 plain, 5 purl, 9 plain,
5 purl, 6 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

37th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 7 purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 1 plain, 9
purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped
stitch over them, 1 plain, 7 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

38th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 7 plain, 3 purl, 4 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 3 plain, 3 purl, 7 plain, 4 purl, make
1, 3 plain.

39th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 4
purl, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over
them, 9 purl, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped
stitch over them, 4 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 3 purl, 4 plain, 3
purl.

40th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 3 plain, 3 purl, 8 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, 8 plain, 3 purl, 3
plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

41st row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1,
20 purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

42d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, 7 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 1 plain, make 1, 7 plain, 5 purl, 4 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3
plain.

43d row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 21
purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 5 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

44th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 5 plain, 7 purl, 6 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, 6
plain, 7 purl, 5 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain.

45th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 6 purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 2 plain, 22
purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped
stitch over them, 2 plain, 6 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

46th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 6 plain, 5 purl, 5 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 2 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 1 plain, knit 2
together plain, make 1, 5 plain, 5 purl, 6 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3
plain.

47th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 7 purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 1 plain, 22
purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped
stitch over them, 1 plain, 7 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

48th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 7 plain, 3 purl, 4 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 4 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 1 plain, knit 2
together plain, make 1, 4 plain, 3 purl, 7 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3
plain.

49th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 4
purl, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over
them, 10 purl, make 1, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 10 purl, slip
1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 4
purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 3 purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

50th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 3 plain, 3 purl, 8 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 2 plain, 3 purl, 2 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 1
plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 8 plain, 3 purl, 3 plain, 4
purl, make 1, 3 plain.

51st row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 4 purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1,
15 purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 15 purl, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 4
purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

52d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, 7 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 3 plain, 5 purl, 3 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 1
plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 7 plain, 5 purl, 4 plain, 4
purl, make 1, 3 plain.

53d row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 5 purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 15
purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 15 purl, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 5
purl, 4 plain, 3 purl.

54th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 4 purl, 5 plain, 7 purl, 6 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 4 plain, 7 purl, 4 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 1
plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 6 plain, 7 purl, 5 plain, 4
purl, make 1, 3 plain.

55th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 4 plain, 6 purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 2 plain, 15
purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped
stitch over them, 2 plain, 15 purl, 2 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together
plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 2 plain, 6 purl, 4
plain, 3 purl. This last row forms the center of the square. The
other half of the square begins with row 56, and is made as follows:

56th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 3 purl,
purl 2 together, 4 plain, 5 purl, 8 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 1 plain, make 1, 4 plain, 5 purl, 4 plain, make 1, 1 plain,
knit 2 together plain, make 1, 8 plain, 5 purl, 4 plain, purl 2
together, 3 purl, make 1, knit 2 together plain, 2 plain.

57th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 5 plain, 4 purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 1 plain, 10
purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped
stitch over them, 1 plain, 16 purl, 1 plain, slip 1, knit 2 together
plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 1 plain, 4 purl, 5
plain, 3 purl.

58th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 3 purl,
purl 2 together, 3 plain, 3 purl, 10 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 1 plain, make 1, 3 plain, 3 purl, 3 plain, make 1, 1 plain,
knit 2 together plain, make 1, 10 plain, 3 purl, 3 plain, purl 2
together, 3 purl, make 1, knit 2 together plain, 2 plain.

59th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 5 plain, 3 purl, slip 1, knit 2 together
plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, 4 purl, make 1, 1
plain, make 1, 12 purl, slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the
slipped stitch over them, 12 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 4 purl,
slip 1, knit 2 together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them,
3 purl, 5 plain, 3 purl.

60th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, 3 purl,
purl 2 together, 7 plain, 3 purl, 7 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, 1 plain, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together
plain, make 1, 7 plain, 3 purl, 7 plain, purl 2 together, 3 purl,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 2 plain.

By following the directions already given and by noticing the
illustration, it will be easy to finish the square. But, at the
beginning and end of rows designated by even numbers, the knitting
must be as at the beginning and end of the 56th, 58th and 60th rows;
upon the other hand, the beginning and end of the rows designated by
odd numbers are worked as the beginning and end of rows 57 and 59.


FANCY PATTERNS FOR KNITTING.

[Illustration: NO. 45. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 45—_Fancy Pattern_.—The number of stitches to be cast on must be
determined by the width of the work, and must also be divisible by
10. Knit in rows, to and fro, as follows:

1st row.—Knit plain.

2d row.—* 1 plain, make 2, narrow by slipping 1 stitch, knitting 1
plain, and drawing the slipped stitch over the 1 knitted. 5 plain,
knit 2 together plain, make 2. Repeat from *.

3d row.—1 purl, * make 2, purl 2 together, 3 purl, purl 2 together,
make 2, 3 purl. Repeat from *.

4th row.—3 plain, * make 2, narrow, 1 plain, knit 2 together plain,
make 2, 5 plain. Repeat from *.

5th row.—3 purl, * make 2, purl 3 together, make 2, 7 purl. Repeat
from *.

6th row.—3 plain, * knit 2 together plain, make 2, 1 plain, make 2,
narrow, 5 plain. Repeat from *.

Repeat from 3d to 5th rows, inclusive. Then from 2d row to 6th row,
inclusive, etc.

[Illustration: NO. 46. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 46—_Fancy Design_.—Cast on the required number of stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, * knit 2 together in twist stitch, knit 2 together
plain, make 2. Repeat from *.

Purl the 2d row, but knit plain the first of every two newly-made
stitches of last row.

3d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, * make 2, knit 2 together in twist stitch,
knit 2 together plain. Repeat from * to end of row.

4th row.—Purl, but knit plain the first of every two newly made
stitches of last row.

Then repeat again from 1st row.

[Illustration: NO. 47. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 47—_Fancy Design_.—Cast on the number of stitches required for
the length of the work.

1st row.—Slip 1. Then alternate to end of row. Make 1, knit 2
together plain.

2d row.—Purl.

Repeat from 1st row.

[Illustration: NO. 48. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 48.—To knit this fancy design, cast on a number of stitches
divisible by 9, and knit in rows to and fro as follows:

1st row.—* 2 plain, knit 2 together plain. Narrow by slipping 1
stitch, knitting plain the next stitch, and drawing the slipped
stitch over the 1 plain. 2 plain, make 1, 1 plain, make 1. Repeat
from *.

2d row.—Purl.

3d row.—1 plain, * knit 2 together plain, narrow, 2 plain, make 1, 1
plain, make 1, 2 plain. Repeat from *.

4th row.—Purl.

5th row.—* Knit 2 together plain, narrow, 1 plain, make 1, 2 plain.
Make in the next stitch 1 plain, 1 purl. Make 1, 1 plain. Repeat
from *.

6th row.—Purl.

7th row.—1 plain, * narrow, make 1, 6 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain. Repeat from *.

8th row.—Purl.

9th row.—* Narrow, make 1, 2 plain, knit 2 together plain, narrow, 2
plain, make 1. Repeat from *.

10th row.—Purl.

11th row.—1 plain, * make 1, 2 plain, knit 2 together, narrow, 2
plain, make 1, 1 plain. Repeat from *.

12th row.—Purl.

13th row.—2 plain, * make 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together plain, narrow,
1 plain, make 1, 2 plain. Make in the next stitch 1 plain, 1 purl.
Repeat from *.

14th row.—Purl.

15th row.—3 plain, * make 1, knit 2 together plain, narrow, make 1, 6
plain. Repeat from *.

16th row.—Purl.

17th row.—* Narrow, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 2 plain, knit 2
together plain. Repeat from *.

With the help of these directions it is now easy to continue the
design.

[Illustration: NO. 49. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 49—_Fancy Design_.—Cast on the required number of stitches for
the length of the work. Knit in rows to and fro, in the following
manner:

1st row.—Purl.

2d row.—Slip 1. Then alternate to end of row: 2 plain, make 2.

3d row.—Slip 1, * purl 2 together, viz.: the next stitch and the
newly-made stitch of last row. Purl 2 together, viz.: the newly made
stitch of last row and the stitch following it. Repeat from *. Purl
the last 2 stitches at the end of row.

4th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, * make 2, 2 plain. Repeat from * to end of
row.

5th row.—Purl 2, * purl 2 together, viz.: the next stitch and the
newly-made stitch of last row. Purl 2 together, viz.: the newly-made
stitch of last row and the stitch following it. Repeat from *. Purl
the last stitch of the row.

Repeat from 2d row to 5th row, inclusive.


LACE EDGINGS.

[Illustration: NO. 50. LACE EDGING.]

No. 50—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 7 stitches, and knit in rows, as
follows:

1st row.—Knit plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain,
in twist stitch, make 2, knit 2 together plain, in twist stitch.

3d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, knit 2 together
plain, in twist stitch, 1 plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain, in
twist stitch.

5th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 1 purl, 3 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain

6th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, knit 2 together
plain, in twist stitch, 2 plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain, in
twist stitch.

7th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 1 purl, 4 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain.

8th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, knit 2 together
plain, in twist stitch, 3 plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain, in
twist stitch.

9th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 1 purl, 5 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain.

10th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, knit 2 together
plain, in twist stitch, 1 plain, make 4, knit 2 together plain, 1
plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain, in twist stitch.

11th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 1 purl, 3 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl,
3 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, knit 2 together
plain, in twist stitch, 10 plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, cast off 8 stitches, 3 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain.

Repeat from 2d to 13th rows, inclusive, until the required length of
edging is reached.

[Illustration: NO. 51. LACE EDGING.]

No. 51—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 8 stitches. Knit 1 row plain.

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, in twist
stitch, 1 plain, make 4, knit 2 together plain.

2d row.—Slip 1. Work in the 4 newly-made stitches of last row 1
plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl. Then knit 3 plain,
make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain, in twist stitch.

3d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, in twist
stitch, 8 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, 9 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, in twist
stitch, 1 plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, in twist
stitch. Alternate 4 times: make 2, knit 2 together plain.

6th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 1 purl. Alternate 3 times: 2 plain, 1 purl.
Then 2 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, in twist stitch, 1 plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, in twist
stitch, 12 plain.

8th row.—Slip 1, 13 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, in twist
stitch, 1 plain.

9th row.—Knit like 7th row.

10th row.—Knit like 8th row.

11th row.—Knit like 7th row.

12th row.—Cast off 9 stitches. Knit 4 plain, make 1, knit 2 together
plain, in twist stitch, 1 plain.

The design is repeated from 1st to 12th rows until the desired length
of the edging is reached.

[Illustration: NO. 52. LACE EDGING.]

No. 52—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 19 stitches and knit in rows as follows:

1st row.—9 plain, * purl 2 together, make 1, 1 plain. Repeat twice
from *. Make 1, 1 plain.

2d row.—Make 1, narrow, viz.: Slip 1, 1 plain, draw the slipped
stitch over 1 plain. Knit plain to end of row.

3d row.—8 plain. Work 3 times as follows: Purl 2 together, make 1, 1
plain. Then make 1, 1 plain, make 1, narrow.

4th row.—Alternate twice: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

5th row.—7 plain. Work 3 times as follows: Purl 2 together, make 1, 1
plain. Then make 1, 1 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, narrow.

6th row.—Alternate 3 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

7th row.—6 plain. Work 3 times as follows: purl 2 together, make 1, 1
plain. Then make 1, 1 plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, narrow.

8th row.—Alternate 4 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

9th row.—5 plain. Work 3 times as follows: Purl 2 together, make 1, 1
plain. Then make 1, 1 plain. Alternate 4 times: make 1, narrow.

10th row.—Alternate 5 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

11th row.—4 plain. Work 3 times as follows: Purl 2 together, make 1,
1 plain. Then make 1, 1 plain. Alternate 5 times: make 1, narrow.

12th row.—Alternate 6 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

13th row.—3 plain. Work 3 times as follows: Purl 2 together, make 1,
1 plain. Then make 1, 1 plain. Alternate 6 times: make 1, narrow.

14th row.—Alternate 7 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

15th row.—2 plain. Work 3 times as follows: Purl 2 together, make 1,
1 plain. Then make 1, 1 plain. Alternate 7 times: make 1, narrow.

16th row.—Alternate 8 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

17th row.—4 plain. Work twice as follows: Make 1, purl 2 together, 1
plain. Then make 1, knit 3 together plain, narrow. Alternate 6 times:
make 1, narrow.

18th row.—Alternate 7 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

19th row.—5 plain. Work twice as follows: Make 1, purl 2 together, 1
plain. Then make 1, narrow twice. Alternate 5 times: make 1, narrow.

20th row.—Alternate 6 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of
row.

21st row.—6 plain. Work twice as follows: Make 1, purl 2 together, 1
plain. Then make 1, narrow twice. Alternate 4 times: make 1, narrow.

22d row.—Alternate 5 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

23d row.—7 plain. Work twice as follows: Make 1, purl 2 together, 1
plain. Then make 1, narrow twice. Alternate 3 times: make 1, narrow.

24th row.—Alternate 4 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

25th row.—8 plain. Work twice as follows: Make 1, purl 2 together, 1
plain. Then make 1, narrow twice. Alternate twice: make 1, narrow.

26th row.—Alternate 3 times: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

27th row.—9 plain. Work twice as follows: Make 1, purl 2 together, 1
plain. Then make 1, narrow twice, make 1, narrow.

28th row.—Alternate twice: make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

29th row.—10 plain. Work twice as follows: Make 1, purl 2 together, 1
plain. Then make 1, narrow twice.

30th row.—Make 1, narrow. Knit plain to end of row.

Repeat from 1st to 30th rows, inclusive, until the required length of
the edging is reached.

[Illustration: NO. 53. LACE EDGING.]

No. _53—Lace Edging_.—Cast on 7 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, 1 purl, 5 plain.

2d row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 2
plain.

3d row.—Make 1, 2 purl, 5 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 3
plain.

5th row.—Make 1, 3 purl, 5 plain.

6th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 4
plain.

7th row.—Make 1, 4 purl, 5 plain.

8th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 2
plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, 4 purl, 5 plain.

10th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 3
plain, knit 2 together plain.

11th row.—Slip 1, 3 purl, 5 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 2
plain, knit 2 together plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 5 plain.

14th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 1
plain, knit 2 together, plain.

Repeat the design from 1st to 14th rows, inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 54. LACE EDGING.]

No. 54—_Lace Edging_.—This pretty pattern is worked width-wise in
rows as follows: Cast on 26 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 19 purl,
knit 2 together plain.

2d row.—Knit plain; but purl the 2d newly-made stitch of last row.

3d row.—Slip 1, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 purl.
Alternate 9 times: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 1 plain.

4th row.—Knit plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 20 purl.

6th row.—Make 1, knit plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain, *
purl 2 together, make 2, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain. Repeat from
* three times.

8th row.—Make 1. Alternate 3 times: 3 purl, 2 plain. Then work 3
purl, 8 plain.

9th to 24th rows.—Work alternately the 7th and 8th rows; but in
each row designated by an odd number, increase the number of plain
stitches that come before the * by one, and each row designated by an
even number increase likewise by one the number of plain stitches at
the end of that row.

25th row.—Slip 1, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 8 plain,
* purl 2 together, make 2, knit 2 together plain, 1 plain. Repeat
from * three times; yet, at the last repetition, knit 3 together
plain instead of knitting the 1 plain.

26th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl. Alternate 3 times: 2 plain, 3 purl. Then 15
plain.

27th to 40th rows.—Work alternately the 25th and 26th rows; but at
the end of every row designated by an odd number knit 2 together
plain instead of 3 together plain, and at the end of every row
designated by an even number decrease by one the number of plain
stitches. Always repeat from 1st to 40th rows, inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 55. LACE EDGING.]

No. 55—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 16 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, 6 plain. Increase 1, viz.: by knitting 1 purl in
the next stitch where the stitch following the “increase 1” must be
knitted. 4 plain, increase 2, 5 plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, narrow, viz.: purl 2 together. Then
make 1, 2 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow.

3d row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, increase 1, 4 plain, increase 1, 2 plain,
increase 1, 5 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 4 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make
1, narrow.

5th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, increase 1, 1 plain, increase 1, 4 plain,
increase 1, 4 plain, increase 1, 6 plain.

6th row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 6 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, 3 plain, increase 1, narrow, make 1, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow.

7th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, narrow, 6 plain, narrow, 3 plain, narrow, 7
plain.

8th row.—Slip 1, 4 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 4 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, 2 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1,
narrow, make 1, narrow.

9th row.—Slip 1, 8 plain, increase 1, 3 plain, narrow, 1 plain,
narrow, 8 plain.

10th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, 2 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, 2 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1,
narrow.

11th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, knit 3 together, 3 plain, knit 3 together,
9 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain. Alternate 7 times: make 1, narrow.

13th row.—Slip 1, 6 plain, increase 1, 4 plain, increase 2, 9 plain.

14th row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 2
plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain, increase 1, make 1,
narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow.

15th row.—Slip 1, 8 plain, increase 1, 4 plain, increase 1, 2 plain,
increase 1, 9 plain.

16th row.—Slip 1, 4 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 4 plain,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 3 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1,
narrow, make 1, narrow.

17th row.—Slip 1, 6 plain, increase 1, 3 plain, increase 1, 4 plain,
increase 1, 4 plain, increase 1, 8 plain.

18th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow,
6 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 3 plain, narrow, make 1,
narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow.

19th row.—Slip 1, 8 plain, narrow, 3 plain, narrow, 3 plain, narrow,
7 plain.

20th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 4
plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 3 plain, make 1, narrow, make
1, narrow, make 1, narrow.

21st row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, narrow, 5 plain, narrow, 1 plain, narrow,
6 plain.

22d row.—Slip 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 2 plain,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1,
narrow, make 1, narrow.

23d row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, knit 3 together, 3 plain, knit 3 together,
5 plain.

24th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate 7 times: make 1, narrow.

Repeat from 1st row until the required length of the edging is
reached.

The lower edge of this edging is finished off with crochet work. Make
in every stitch of the edge 1 close chain stitch, 3 chain stitches, 1
close chain stitch.

The upper edge of the edging is also finished off with crochet work.
Make 1 close chain stitch in every stitch of the edge. Make another
row of close chain stitches, and a third row of double crochet.

[Illustration: NO. 56. LACE EDGING.]

No. 56—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 20 stitches and knit in rows, to and
fro, as follows:

1st row.—14 plain, make 1, knit 3 together plain, make 1, narrow, 1
plain.

2d row.—Knit plain.

3d row.—12 plain, narrow, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 2 plain.

4th row.—Knit plain.

5th row.—11 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 1 twist stitch
(knitted from the back), make 1, narrow, make 1, 2 plain.

6th row.—Knit plain.

7th row.—10 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 3 plain, make 1,
narrow, make 1, 2 plain.

8th row.—Knit plain.

9th row.—9 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 5 plain, make 1,
narrow, make 1, 2 plain.

10th row.—Knit plain.

11th row.—8 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 7 plain, make 1,
narrow, make 1, 2 plain.

12th row.—Knit plain.

13th row.—7 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 9 plain, make 1,
narrow, make 1, 2 plain.

14th row.—Knit plain.

15th row.—6 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 11 plain, make 1,
narrow, make 1, 2 plain.

16th row.—Knit plain.

17th row.—5 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow, make 1, 3 plain, knit 3
together plain, make 4, 3 together plain, 4 plain, make 1, narrow,
make 1, 2 plain.

18th row.—Knit this row plain; but in the “make 4” of last row, knit
1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl.

19th row.—7 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 9 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

20th row.—Knit plain.

21st row.—8 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 7 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

22d row.—Knit plain.

23d row.—9 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 5 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

24th row.—Knit plain.

25th row.—10 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 3 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

26th row.—Knit plain.

27th row.—11 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain, narrow,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

28th row.—Knit plain.

29th row.—12 plain, make 1, narrow, make 1, knit 3 together plain,
make 1, narrow, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

30th row.—Knit plain.

31st row.—13 plain, make 1, narrow, 1 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow,
1 plain.

32d row.—Knit plain.

Repeat from 1st to 32d rows, inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 57. LACE EDGING.]

No. 57—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 18 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain, and draw the slipped stitch over them, make 2, knit 2
together plain, 2 plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain, 6 plain.

2d row.—Knit plain; but in every “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain,
1 purl. Every row—to the 14th row, inclusive—designated by an even
number is worked like the 2d row, and will therefore receive no
further mention.

3d row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain and draw slipped stitch over them, make 2, knit 2
together plain, 4 plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain, 5 plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain and draw slipped stitch over them, make 2, knit 2
together plain, 2 plain.

_Raised Work_, viz.: 1 plain; slip this 1 plain on the left needle,
and then knit 1 plain in it without withdrawing the left needle from
the loop. * Slip on the left needle the 1 plain which is on the
right needle and knit 1 plain in it without withdrawing the left
needle from the loop. Repeat from *. Bring the yarn forward; pass it
backward between the last stitch made and the 3 next stitches, and
cast off these 4 stitches. Thus the first raised work is formed.

Then 3 plain, make 2, knit 2 together plain, 4 plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain and draw the slipped stitch over them, make 2, knit 2
together plain, 4 plain, _raised work_ as in 5th row, 3 plain, make
2, knit 2 together plain, 3 plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain and draw the slipped stitch over them, make 2, knit
2 together plain, 6 plain, _raised work_, 3 plain, make 2, knit 2
together plain, 2 plain.

11th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain and draw the slipped stitch over them, make 2, knit
2 together plain, 8 plain, _raised work_, 3 plain, make 2, knit 2
together plain, 1 plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain and draw the slipped stitch over them, make 2, knit
2 together plain, 10 plain, _raised work_, 3 plain, make 2, knit 2
together plain.

15th row.—Slip 1, knit 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, knit 2
together plain and draw the slipped stitch over them, make 2, 2
together plain, 12 plain, _raised work_, 4 plain.

16th row.—Cast off 7 stitches, 17 plain. Repeat from 1st to 16th rows
inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 58. LACE EDGING.]

No. 58—_Lace Edging_.—This edging may be knitted with either worsted
or cotton of medium size. Cast on 15 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate 5 times: make 1, knit 2 together
in twist stitch. Then make 1, 2 plain.

2d row.—Knit plain.

3d row.—Slip 1, 12 plain. Unravel the next stitch of the 2d row
which was made in the last “make 1” of the 1st row. Take up on the
left needle the 2 loops formed by that unraveling, and work in them
8 stitches as follows: 1 plain in the loop belonging to the 2d row.
Make 1 plain out of the 2 loops. * Pass the yarn from front to back
over the point of the right needle, and out of the 2 loops make 1
plain. Repeat twice from *. Then knit 2 plain.

4th row.—Knit plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate 5 times: make 1, knit 2 together
plain, in twist stitch. Then 10 plain.

6th and 7th rows.—Knit plain.

8th row.—Cast off 8 stitches, 14 plain.

Repeat from 1st to 8th rows, inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 59 LACE EDGING.]

No. 59—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 9 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, narrow (by knitting 2 together plain), make
1, narrow twice.

2d row.—Knit plain; but in the “make 1” of the last row, knit 1
plain, 1 purl.

Every row designated by an even number must be knitted like the 2d
row.

3d row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, narrow, make 1, 2 plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow twice, make 1, 2 plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow twice, make 1, 2
plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, narrow, make 1, narrow twice, make 1,
narrow twice.

11th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, narrow twice, make 1, narrow twice.

12th row.—Like the 2d row.

Repeat from 1st row until the required length of edging is worked.

[Illustration: NO. 60. LACE EDGING.]

No. 60—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 10 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, knit 2
together plain, 2 plain.

2d row.—Knit plain; but in the “make 1” of last row knit 1 plain, 1
purl.

3d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, knit 2
together plain, knit 2 together plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain.

4th row.—Like 2d row.

Repeat these 4 rows until the required length of edging is worked.

[Illustration: NO. 61. LACE INSERTION.]

No. 61—_Insertion_.—Cast on 24 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, make 1, knit 2 together plain, 9 plain, 4 purl, 6
plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, make 1, knit 2 together plain, 3 plain. Alternate
twice: make 1, knit.

2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: knit 2 together
plain, make 1. Then 4 plain, make 1, knit 2 together plain.

3d row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 8 plain, 4 purl, 7 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 3
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 7 plain, 4 purl, 8 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

6th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain. Alternate 3
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate twice: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 6 plain, 4 purl, 9 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

8th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 4
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate twice: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 5 plain, 4 purl, 10 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

10th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain. Alternate 4
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain, 2 together plain, make
1, 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

11th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 4 plain, 4 purl, 11
plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 5
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain, 2 together plain, make
1, 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain, 4 purl, 12
plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

14th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain. Alternate 4
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain, 2 together plain, make
1, 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

15th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 4 plain, 4 purl, 11
plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

16th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 4
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate twice: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

17th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 5 plain, 4 purl, 10
plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

18th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain. Alternate 3
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate twice: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

19th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 6 plain, 4 purl, 9 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

20th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 3
times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

21st row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 7 plain, 4 purl, 8 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

22d row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain. Alternate twice:
make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: 2 together
plain, make 1. Then 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

23d row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 8 plain, 4 purl, 7 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

24th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate twice:
make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate 4 times: 2 together
plain, make 1. Then 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

25th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 9 plain, 4 purl, 6 plain,
make 1, 2 together plain.

26th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain, make 1, 2
together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 4 times: 2 together plain, make 1.
Then 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

27th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 10 plain, 4 purl, 5
plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

28th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain, make 1, 2
together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 5 times: 2 together plain, make 1.
Then 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

29th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 11 plain, 4 purl, 4
plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

30th row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain, make 1, 2
together plain, 2 plain. Alternate 4 times: 2 together plain, make 1.
Then 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

31st row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 10 plain, 4 purl, 5
plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

32d row.—Slip 1, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate twice:
make 1, 2 together plain. Then 2 plain. Alternate 4 times: 2 together
plain, make 1. Then 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain.

Repeat from 1st to 32d rows, inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 62. CORNER OF AN EDGING.]

No. 62—_Corner Border_.—This may be worked with cotton, crochet
cotton or worsted. Cast on 24 stitches and knit in rows to and fro as
follows:

1st row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, 2 together plain. Alternate 3 times: make
2, 2 together plain, twice. Then make 2, 2 together plain, 4 plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, knit plain to end of row; but in every “make 2” of
last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl.

3d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 2 together plain. Alternate 4 times: make 2,
2 together plain, twice. Then make 2, 2 together plain, 2 plain.

4th row.—Like 2d row.

Repeat from 1st to 4th rows, inclusive. Then work like 1st and 2d
rows.

11th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together
plain, twice, make 2, 2 together plain, 4 plain, 2 together plain,
make 2, 2 together plain, twice, make 2, 2 together plain, 2 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, 9 plain, 4 purl, 10 plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together
plain, 8 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain, 4 plain.

14th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, 8 purl, 8 plain.

15th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together
plain, 4 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain, 4 plain,
2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain, 2 plain.

16th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, 12 purl, 6 plain.

17th row.—Like 13th row.

18th row.—Like 14th row.

19th row.—Like 11th row.

20th row.—Like 12th row.

In order to make the corner of this border, knit 2 together plain at
the end of each row, on the wrong side of the work, and be careful to
carry on the design in doing so. When the work has been narrowed down
to a point, work back again, in rows, to where the corner was begun.
While working back, increase by making 1 plain in the narrowing of
each row narrowed when working _down_ to the point.

[Illustration: NO. 63. CORNER OF AN EDGING.]

No. 63—_Corner Border_.—Cast on 21 stitches and knit in rows to and
fro as follows:

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. * Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then 2 plain. Repeat twice from *.

2d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. * Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain.
Then 1 purl, 1 plain. Repeat twice from *; but at the end of the
second repetition make 2 plain, instead of 1 purl, 1 plain.

Repeat indefinitely 1st and 2d rows.

The corner of this border is worked like that of No. 62.

[Illustration: NO. 64. LACE INSERTION.]

No. 64—_Insertion_.—This is worked width-wise in plain rows. Cast on
14 stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 2 plain, make 4, 4 plain, make 1,
narrow, 1 plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, narrow, 4 plain, narrow, 2
plain, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

3d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 8 plain, make 1, narrow, 1
plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, 8 plain, make 1, narrow, 1
plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, narrow, narrow, 2 plain, narrow, 2
plain, make 1, narrow, 1 plain.

Repeat from 1st to 5th rows, inclusive, until required length is
worked.

[Illustration: NO. 65. LACE EDGING.]

No. 65—_Lace Edging_.—This is knitted width-wise in rows. Cast on 12
stitches.

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 together in twist stitch, make 2, 2 together in
twist stitch, 1 twist stitch. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together in
twist stitch. Then make 1, 2 twist stitches.

2d row.—Slip 1, knit plain to end of row; but in the “make 2” of last
row knit 1 plain, 1 purl.

3d row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, in twist stitch, make 2, 2 together
plain, in twist stitch, 1 twist stitch, 5 plain. Take up on the left
needle the 2 loops of the opening just below and make in them 1
plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1
plain. Then knit the two last stitches plain.

4th row.—Like the 2d.

5th row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, in twist stitch, make 2, 2
together plain, in twist stitch, 1 twist stitch. Alternate 7 times:
make 1, 2 together in twist stitch. Then 2 plain.

6th row.—Like the 2d.

7th row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, in twist stitch, make 2, 2
together plain, in twist stitch, 1 twist stitch. 16 plain.

8th row.—Cast off 10 stitches. Knit 8 plain, 1 purl, 2 plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 8 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 66. LACE EDGING.]

No. 66—_Lace Edging_.—This edging is worked with crochet cotton,
upon a fancy feather-edge braid having trefoil loops on one side and
single loops on the other. Cast on 6 stitches and knit width-wise as
follows:

1st row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Then,
on the side of the braid having single loops, knit 1 plain in one of
these loops.

2d row.—4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

3d row.—Like the 1st; but at the end knit 3 plain instead of 2 plain.

4th row.—Like the 2d; but at the beginning make 5 plain instead of 4
plain.

5th row.—Like the 1st; but at the end knit 4 plain instead of 2 plain.

6th row.—1 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain, 1
plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain. Then in
the “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain. Then 2 plain.
Knit 1 plain in next loop of braid.

8th row.—8 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain, cast off
3 stitches, 1 plain, 1 plain next loop of braid.

10th row.—3 plain, make 2, 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1
plain.

11th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Knit
in the “make 2” of last row 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl. Then 3
plain, 1 plain in next loop of braid.

12th row.—11 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain, cast
off 4 stitches, 2 plain, 1 plain in next loop of braid.

14th row.—4 plain, make 2, 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

15th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain. Then
in the “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl,
1 plain. Then 4 plain. Out of the 2 following loops of braid make 1
plain.

16th row.—14 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

17th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 4 plain, cast
off 5 stitches, 3 plain, 1 plain out of next 2 loops of braid.

18th row.—5 plain, make 3, 5 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

19th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 4 plain. Then
in the “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1
plain, 1 purl. Then 5 plain. Out of the 3 next loops of braid make 1
plain.

20th row.—2 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain, 6
plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain, 1 plain, make 1, 2
together plain, 1 plain.

21st row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain. In
the “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain. Cast off 6
stitches. In the “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl. Then 2
together plain. Out of the next stitch and the next two loops of
braid, taken together, knit 1 plain.

22d row.—5 plain, make 2, 5 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

23d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 4 plain. In the
“make 2” of last row 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain. Then
4 plain. Out of the next stitch and the next 2 loops of braid, taken
together, knit 1 plain.

24th row.—15 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

25th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain, cast
off 5 stitches, 2 plain, 2 together plain. Out of next stitch and
next loop of braid 1 plain.

26th row.—5 plain, make 2, 4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

27th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 3 plain. In the
“make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl. Then 2
plain, 2 together plain. Out of the next stitch and the next loop of
braid knit 1 plain.

28th row.—12 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

29th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain, cast
off 4 stitches, 1 plain, 2 together plain. Out of next stitch and the
next loop of braid 1 plain.

30th row.—4 plain, make 2, 3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

31st row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. In the
“make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain. Then 2 together
plain. Out of next stitch and next loop of braid knit 1 plain.

32d row.—9 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

33d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain, cast off
3 stitches, 2 together plain. Out of the next stitch and the next
loop of braid knit 1 plain.

34th row.—3 plain, make 1, 2 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

35th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain, 1
plain, 1 purl, 2 together plain. Then out of the next stitch and the
next loop of braid 1 plain.

36th row.—1 plain, 2 together plain twice, 1 plain, make 1, 2
together plain, 1 plain.

37th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Out of
next stitch and next loop of braid 1 plain.

38th row.—4 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

39th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain twice. Out of
next stitch and next loop of braid 1 plain.

40th row.—3 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, 1 plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 40 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 67. LACE INSERTION.]

No. 67—_Insertion_.—Cast on 20 stitches. Knit in rows to and fro as
follows:

1st row.—Knit plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Work 4 times as follows: 2 together plain,
make 2, 2 together plain in twist stitch. After the fourth time, 2
plain.

3d row.—Knit plain; but in each “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1
purl.

4th row.—Slip 1, 3 plain. Work 3 times as follows: 2 together plain,
make 2, 2 together plain in twist stitch. Then 4 plain.

5th row.—Like 3d.

6th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain. Work twice as follows: 2 together plain,
make 2, 2 together plain in twist stitch. Then 6 plain.

7th row.—Like 3d.

8th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain
in twist stitch.

9th row.—Like 3d.

10th row.—Plain.

11th row.—Like 3d.

12th row.—Like 8th.

13th row.—Like 3d.

14th row.—Like 6th.

15th row.—Like 3d.

16th row.—Like 4th.

Repeat indefinitely these 16 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 68. LACE EDGING.]

No. 68—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 21 stitches.

1st row.—Knit plain.

The following rows, designated by an odd number, are worked like 3d
row in No. 67.

2d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Work four times as follows: 2 together
plain, make 2, 2 together plain in twist stitch. Then 3 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, 3 plain. Work 3 times: 2 together plain, make 2, 2
together plain in twist stitch. Then 4 plain. In the last stitch make
1 plain, 1 purl.

6th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain. Work twice as follows: 2 together plain,
make 2, 2 together plain in twist stitch. Then 7 plain. In the last
stitch knit 1 plain, 1 purl.

8th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain
in twist stitch, 10 plain. In the last stitch make 1 plain, 1 purl.

10th row.—Slip 1, 16 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together
plain in twist stitch, 3 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain
in twist stitch, 10 plain, 2 together plain.

14th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain. Work twice as follows: 2 together plain,
make 2, 2 together plain in twist stitch. Then 7 plain, 2 together
plain.

16th row.—Slip 1, 3 plain. Work 3 times as follows: 2 together plain,
make 2, 2 together plain in twist stitch. Then 4 plain, 2 together
plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 16 rows; but in the 2d repetition knit the
10th row plain, as also in every alternate repetition; that is, knit
10th row plain, in 4th, 6th, 8th, etc. repetitions. The upper and
lower edges are finished off by crocheting 1 close chain stitch in
each stitch of those edges.

[Illustration: NO. 69. LACE INSERTION.]

No. 69—_Insertion_.—Cast on 28 stitches and knit in rows to and fro
in the following manner:

1st row.—Knit plain. Each row designated by an odd number must be
knitted plain, but in every “make 2” knit 1 plain, 1 purl.

2d row.—Slip 1. Alternate 3 times: 2 together plain in twist stitch,
make 1. Then 2 together plain in twist stitch, 3 plain. _Raised
Work_, _i. e._ [knit 1 plain in next stitch without withdrawing the
left needle from the loop, slip on the left needle this 1 plain, *
knit 1 plain in the latter without withdrawing the left needle from
the loop, slip on the left needle this 1 plain. Repeat once from *,
pass the yarn from front to back between the 1 plain last made and
the remaining stitches on the left needle. Then cast off these 3
loops.] Knit 2 plain. Work in next stitch the raised work in same
manner as already described. Knit 3 plain. Then alternate 3 times: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 2 together plain, 1 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1. Alternate 3 times: 2 together plain in twist stitch,
make 1. Then 2 together plain in twist stitch, 2 plain, 2 together
plain in twist stitch, make 2, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate
3 times: 2 together plain in twist stitch, make 1. Then 2 together
plain, 1 plain.

6th row.—Slip 1. Alternate 3 times: 2 together plain in twist stitch,
make 1. Then 2 together plain in twist stitch, 6 plain. Alternate 3
times: 2 together plain, make 1. Then 2 together plain, 1 plain.

8th row.—Like 6th row, but knit 4 plain instead of the 6 plain.

10th row.—Like 6th row, but knit 2 plain instead of the 6 plain.

12th row.—Form on the left needle 5 new stitches from the 1st stitch.
Cast off these 5 stitches and thus form the 1st bar. Alternate 3
times: 2 together plain in twist stitch, make 1. After this, 2
together plain in twist stitch. Alternate 3 times: 2 together plain,
make 1. Then 2 together plain, 1 plain. Turn the work and form 5 new
stitches from the 1st stitch. Cast off these 5 stitches and thus form
the 2d bar. Then knit plain to end of row.

14th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain
in twist stitch. Then make 1, 4 plain, make 1. Alternate twice: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 2 plain.

16th row.—Like 14th, but knit 6 plain instead of 4 plain.

18th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain
in twist stitch. Then make 1, 2 plain, 2 together plain in twist
stitch, make 2, 2 together plain, 2 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2
together plain. Then make 1, 2 plain.

20th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain
in twist stitch. Then make 1, 3 plain, raised work in next stitch, 2
plain, raised work in next stitch, 3 plain. Alternate twice: make 1,
2 together plain. Then make 1, 2 plain.

22d row.—Like 14th row; but knit 12 plain instead of 4 plain.

24th row.—In order to make the bar joining the two points, form on
the left needle 5 new stitches from the first stitch of this row
without withdrawing the left needle from the loop of this first
stitch. Take up on left needle the stitch at the end of bar in 12th
row, and form 5 new stitches from it. Take up on left needle the
stitch of the preceding point; then cast off stitches formed from
beginning of 24th row. Knit 1 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2
together plain in twist stitch. Then make 1, 2 plain, 2 together
plain in twist stitch, make 2, 2 together plain, 1 plain, raised work
in next stitch, 2 together plain in twist stitch, make 2, 2 together
plain, 2 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then make
1, 2 plain. Turn the work, and, starting from the first stitch, make
bar in same manner as at beginning of last row.

Repeat indefinitely these 24 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 70. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 70—_Fancy Design_.—Cast on the number of stitches required for
the length of the work.

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, * make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 3
plain. Repeat from * to end of row. At end of row 3 plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, * make 1, 1 purl, make 1, 5 purl. Repeat from
*. At end of row 4 purl.

3d row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, * make 1, drop from needle the “make 1” of
last row, 1 twist stitch, make 1, drop from needle the “make 1” of
last row, 5 plain. Repeat from *. At end of row 4 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, 3 purl, * make 1, drop from needle the “make 1” of
last row, 1 twist stitch, make 1, drop from needle the “make 1” of
last row, 5 purl. Repeat from *. At the end of the row make 4 purl.

5th to 10th rows.—Alternate 3d and 4th rows.

11th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 2 together plain, * make 1, drop from
needle the “make 1” of last row, 1 twist stitch, make 1, drop from
needle the “make 1” of last row, 2 together plain, 1 plain, 2
together plain. Repeat from *. At end of row make 2 together plain, 2
plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, purl 2 together, * make 1, 3 purl, make 1, 3
together. Repeat from *. At end of row 2 together, 1 purl.

13th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, * make 1, slip 1, 2 together and draw the
slipped stitch over them, make 1, 2 together, make 1, 1 plain. Repeat
from *. At end of row knit 2 plain.

14th row.—Slip 1, 1 purl, * make 1, 2 together, 1 purl, 2 together,
make 1, 1 purl. Repeat from *. At end of row 2 purl.

[Illustration: NO. 71. LACE INSERTION.]

No. 71—_Insertion_.—Cast on 27 stitches and knit in rows to and fro.

1st row.—Slip 1, 12 plain, 1 purl, 13 plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, 2 together plain.
Then make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 3 plain, make 1, 3 together
plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then make 1, 3
plain.

3d row.—Slip 1, 11 plain, 3 purl, 12 plain.

4th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 5 plain, make 1, 3
together plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, 2 together plain. Then
make 1, 2 plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, 10 plain, 5 purl, 11 plain.

6th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain.
Then make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 7 plain, make 1, 3 together
plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then make 1, 3
plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, 9 plain, 7 purl, 10 plain.

8th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain.
Then make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 2 plain, 2 together plain,
make 1, 1 purl, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain, make 1, 3 together
plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then make 1, 2
plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, 8 plain, 4 purl, 1 plain, 4 purl, 9 plain.

10th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, make 1, 3
together plain, make 1, 2 plain, 2 together plain, make 1, 3 purl,
make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain, make 1, 3 together plain, make 1,
2 together plain, make 1, 3 plain.

11th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, 4 purl, 3 plain, 4 purl, 8 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 together plain, make 1, 3
together plain, make 1, 2 plain, 2 together plain, make 1, 5 purl,
make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain, make 1, 3 together plain, make 1,
2 together plain, make 1, 2 plain.

13th row.—Slip 1, 6 plain, 4 purl, 5 plain, 4 purl, 7 plain.

14th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 2 plain,
2 together plain, make 1, 7 purl, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain,
make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 3 plain.

15th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, 4 purl, 7 plain, 4 purl, 6 plain.

16th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, 3 together plain, make 1, 2 plain,
2 together plain, make 1, 2 purl, purl 2 together, make 3, purl
3 together, purl 2, make 1, 2 together plain, 2 plain, make 1, 3
together plain, make 1, 2 plain.

17th row.—Slip 1, 4 plain, 4 purl, 3 plain. In the “make 3” of last
row 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain. Then 3 plain, 4 purl, 5 plain.

18th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain.
Then 2 plain, make 1, purl 2 together, 5 purl, purl 2 together, make
1, 2 plain. Alternate twice: 2 together plain, make 1. Then 3 plain.

19th row.—Slip 1, 5 plain, 4 purl, 7 plain, 4 purl, 6 plain.

20th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then 2 plain, make 1, purl 2 together, 3 purl, purl 2
together, make 1, 2 plain, 2 together plain. Alternate twice: make 1,
2 together plain. Then make 1, 2 plain.

21st row.—Slip 1, 6 plain, 4 purl, 5 plain, 4 purl, 7 plain.

22d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then 2 plain, make 1, purl 2 together, 1 purl, purl 2
together, make 1, 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: 2 together plain, make
1. Then 3 plain.

23d row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, 4 purl, 3 plain, 4 purl, 8 plain.

24th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate 4 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then 2 plain, make 1, purl 3 together, make 1, 2 plain.
Alternate 4 times: 2 together plain, make 1. Then 2 plain.

25th row.—Slip 1, 8 plain, 4 purl, 1 plain, 4 purl, 9 plain.

26th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate 4 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then 5 plain. Alternate 4 times: 2 together plain, make 1.
Then 3 plain.

27th row.—Slip 1, 9 plain, 7 purl, 10 plain.

28th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate 5 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then 3 plain. Alternate 5 times: 2 together plain, make 1.
Then 2 plain.

29th row.—Slip 1, 10 plain, 5 purl, 11 plain.

30th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain. Alternate 5 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then 1 plain. Alternate 5 times: 2 together plain, make 1.
Then 3 plain.

31st row.—Slip 1, 11 plain, 3 purl, 12 plain.

32d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain. Alternate 5 times: make 1, 2 together
plain. Then make 1, 3 together plain, make 1. Alternate 5 times: 2
together plain, make 1. Then 2 plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 32 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 72. LACE EDGING.]

No. 72—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 47 stitches, and knit in rows to fro.

1st row.—Plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, 7 plain.

_Raised Work_, _i. e._ [out of the next stitch form 7 stitches as
follows: knit 1 plain without withdrawing the left needle from the
loop, * slip this 1 plain on the left needle and knit 1 plain in it.
Repeat from * until 7 stitches have been formed. Cast off these 7
stitches.]

Knit 3 plain, “raised work” in next stitch, 8 plain. Alternate 7
times: purl 2 together, make 1. Then 2 plain, purl 2 together, make
2, purl 2 together, 6 plain.

3d row.—Plain; but in every “make 2” of preceding row knit 1 purl, 1
plain.

Each row designated by an odd number must be knitted like the 3d row.

4th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
10 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together. Alternate 6
times: purl 2 together, make 1. Then 2 plain, purl 2 together,
make 2, purl 2 together, 4 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2
together, 1 plain.

6th row.—Slip 1, 15 plain. With following stitch fasten the 2d
“raised work” of 2d row by taking up on left needle the stitch at the
end of the “raised work,” and knitting it with the following stitch
together, 2 plain. Alternate 5 times: purl 2 together, make 1. Then
2 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 11 plain. In the
last stitch of row knit 1 purl, 1 plain.

8th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
6 plain. Now fasten in next stitch the 1st “raised work” in manner
already described. Then 1 plain, purl together, make 2, purl 2
together. Alternate 4 times: purl 2 together, make 1. Then 2 plain,
purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 11 plain, purl 2 together,
make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain.

10th row.—Slip 1, 11 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
1 plain. Alternate 3 times: purl 2 together, make 1. Then 2 plain,
purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 9 plain. “Raised work,” as
in 2d row. Then 8 plain. In last stitch of row 1 purl, 1 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
4 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 2 plain. Alternate
twice: purl 2 together, make 1. Then 2 plain, purl 2 together, make
2, purl 2 together, 6 plain, “raised work,” 5 plain, purl 2 together,
make 2, purl 2 together, 2 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2
together, 1 plain.

14th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
3 plain, purl 2 together, make 1, 2 plain, purl 2 together, make 2,
purl 2 together, 13 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together
twice. Then make 2, purl 2 together, 4 plain. In last stitch of row 1
purl, 1 plain.

16th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together
twice, make 2, purl 2 together, 4 plain, purl 2 together, make 1,
purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 9 plain. In next stitch
fasten 1 “raised work,” 2 plain, fasten the other “raised work,” 5
plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 3 plain, purl 2
together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain.

18th row.—Slip 1, 7 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
4 plain, make 1, purl 2 together, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2,
purl 2 together, 5 plain, “raised work,” 3 plain, “raised work,” 3
plain. Then purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together twice, make 2,
purl 2 together, 4 plain, purl 2 together.

20th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
4 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 3 plain. Alternate
twice: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 1 plain, purl 2 together,
make 2, purl 2 together, 12 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2
together, 2 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain.

22d row.—Slip 1, 11 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
2 plain. Alternate 3 times: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 1 plain,
purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 4 plain, fasten “raised
work,” 4 plain, fasten “raised work,” 8 plain, purl 2 together.

24th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
5 plain, “raised work,” 2 plain. Then purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2
together, 1 plain. Alternate 4 times: make 1, purl 2 together. Then
1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 11 plain, purl 2
together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain.

26th row.—Slip 1, 14 plain, “raised work,” 4 plain. Alternate 5
times: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 1 plain, purl 2 together, make
2, purl 2 together, 11 plain, purl 2 together.

28th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together,
10 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain.
Alternate 6 times: make 1, purl 2 together. Then 1 plain, purl 2
together, make 2, purl 2 together, 4 plain, purl 2 together, make 2,
purl 2 together, 1 plain.

30th row.—Slip 1, 21 plain. Alternate 6 times: make 1, purl 2
together. Then 2 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 4
plain, purl 2 together, 1 plain.

32d row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 2
plain, fasten “raised work,” 3 plain, fasten “raised work,” 5 plain,
purl 2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain. Alternate 7 times:
make 1, purl 2 together. Then 2 plain, purl 2 together, make 2, purl
2 together, make 2, purl 2 together, 1 plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 32 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 73. LACE EDGING.]

No. 73—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 13 stitches, and knit in rows to and
fro.

1st row.—3 purl, 8 plain, 2 purl.

2d row.—Narrow, by slipping 1 stitch, knitting 1 plain and drawing
the slipped stitch over it; make 1, 8 purl, make 1, slip 1, 2
together plain and draw slipped stitch over them.

3d row.—Make in the next stitch 1 plain, 1 purl. Then 10 plain, 1
purl.

4th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, make 1, purl 2 together, 4 purl, purl 2
together, make 1, 3 plain.

5th row.—In the next stitch 1 plain, 1 purl. Then 3 purl, 6 plain, 3
purl.

6th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 1, purl 2 together, 2 purl, purl 2
together, make 1, 5 plain.

7th row.—In the next stitch, 1 plain, 1 purl. Then 5 purl, 4 plain, 4
purl.

8th row.—Slip 1, 3 plain, make 1, purl 2 together twice, make 1, 1
plain, 2 together plain, make 2, 2 together plain, 2 plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, 2 purl, 1 plain, 1 purl, 3 purl, 2 plain, 5 purl.

10th row.—Slip 1, 1 plain, 2 together plain, make 1, 4 purl, make 1,
2 together plain, 3 plain, 2 together plain.

11th row.—Slip 1, 4 purl, 6 plain, 3 purl.

12th row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, make 1, 6 purl, make 1, 2
together plain, 1 plain, 2 together plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 12 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 74. LACE EDGING.]

No. 74—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 15 stitches, knit width-wise in rows to
and fro.

1st row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, 2 together plain
and draw slipped stitch over them, make 2, 2 together plain, 2 plain,
make 3, 2 plain. Alternate 3 times: make 2, 1 plain.

2d row.—Plain; but in each “make 2,” knit 1 purl, 1 plain; and in the
“make 3” knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain.

3d row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, 2 together plain
and draw slipped stitch over them, make 2, 2 together plain, 1
plain, 2 together plain, 1 plain. Raised work, _i. e._, [from the
next stitch form 7 new stitches, as follows: knit 1 plain without
withdrawing the left needle from the loop: * slip this 1 plain on the
left needle and knit 1 plain in it. Repeat from * until 7 stitches
have been formed. Cast off these 7 stitches.] Alternate 3 times: 2
plain, raised work in the next stitch. Then 2 plain.

4th row.—Plain.

5th row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, 2 together plain
and draw slipped stitch over them, make 2, 2 together plain, 15 plain.

6th row.—Plain.

7th row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, 2 together plain,
and draw slipped stitch over them, make 2, 2 together plain, 5 plain.
Alternate 3 times: knit together the next stitch with the stitch at
end of raised work of 3d row, 2 plain. Then join the fourth raised
work of 3d row with the following stitch.

8th row.—Slip 1 and lengthen the loop somewhat, 9 plain and lengthen
each loop evenly, make 3, 2 together plain, 11 plain.

9th row.—Slip 1, 2 together plain, make 2, slip 1, 2 together plain
and draw slipped stitch over them, make 2, 2 together plain, 7 plain.
In the “make 3” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl, 1 plain. Knit
together plain the 10 long loops and draw over them the preceding
stitch.

10th row.—Plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 10 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 75. LACE EDGING.]

No. 75—_Lace Edging_.—Cast on 16 stitches and knit in rows to and fro.

1st row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then purl
10. In the last stitch 1 plain, 1 purl.

2d row—Plain.

3d row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then purl
11. In the last stitch 1 purl, 1 plain.

4th row.—Plain.

5th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 1
purl. Alternate 6 times: make 1, purl 2 together.

6th row.—Plain.

7th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 11
purl, 2 together plain.

8th row.—Plain.

9th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then purl
10, purl 2 together.

10th row.—Plain.

11th row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: make 1, 2 together plain. Then 1
purl, 10 plain.

12th row.—Slip 1, 9 purl. Leave remaining stitch of 11th row
untouched.

13th row.—Slip 1, 9 plain.

14th and 15th rows.—Like 12th and 13th rows.

16th row.—Slip 1, 9 purl, 6 plain.

Repeat indefinitely these 16 rows.

[Illustration: NO. 76. FANCY STITCH.]

No. 76—_Fancy Design_.—Cast on a number of stitches divisible by 18
and knit in rows to and fro.

1st row.—* purl 2, 2 plain, 7 purl, 2 plain, 2 purl, make 1, 3
together in twist stitch, make 1.

Repeat from *.

N. B.—When knitting rows designated by even numbers the stitches
of each preceding row which were purled will _appear_ plain on the
wrong side of work. Such stitches must be knitted plain. Likewise the
stitches of preceding row knitted plain must be purled. Purl every
“make 1.”

3d row.—* 2 purl, 1 plain, 2 together in twist stitch, 5 purl, 2
together, 1 plain, 2 purl, 1 plain, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 1 plain.
Repeat from *.

5th row.—* 2 purl, 1 plain, 2 together in twist stitch, 3 purl, 2
together, 1 plain, 2 purl, 2 plain, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 plain.
Repeat from *.

7th row.—* 2 purl, 1 plain, 2 together in twist stitch, 1 purl, 2
together, 1 plain, 2 purl, 2 plain, 1 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1,
1 purl, 2 plain. Repeat from *.

9th row.—* 2 purl, 1 plain, 3 together in twist stitch, 1 plain, 2
purl, 2 plain, 2 purl, make 1, 1 plain, make 1, 2 purl, 2 plain.
Repeat from *.

11th row.—* 2 purl, make 1, 3 together in twist stitch, make 1, 2
purl, 2 plain, 7 purl, 2 plain. Repeat from *.

Repeat indefinitely from 3d to 11th rows, inclusive.

[Illustration: NO. 77. AFGHAN.]

No. 77—_Afghan_.—This Afghan has seven stripes, each one yard in
length. The stripes are sewed together on the wrong side of the work.
Four of them are worked with garnet zephyr, the remaining three with
steel-gray zephyr. The border is finished off with an edging. For the
stripes knitted with garnet zephyr, cast on 27 stitches and work in
rows to and fro.

1st row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: 3 purl, 8 plain. Then 4 purl.

2d row.—Slip 1. Alternate twice: 3 plain, 8 purl. Then 4 plain.

3d and 5th rows.—Like 1st row.

4th and 6th rows.—Like 2d row.

7th row.—Slip 1. Then * 3 purl. Slip 4 on a special needle and on
right needle knit plain the next 4 stitches which are on left needle.
From the _special_ needle knit plain the 4 stitches which are on it.
Repeat once from *. Then 4 purl.

Repeat from 2d to 7th rows, inclusive, until the required length is
reached.

For the stripes knitted with steel-gray zephyr cast on 15 stitches
and work to and fro in rows.

1st to 10th rows.—Plain.

11th to 22d rows.—* 1 plain, make 1, slip 1 by passing right needle
through the loop, as if to purl it.

Repeat from * to end of row; but in every following row knit together
plain the slipped stitch and “the make 1” of preceding row, and slip
the stitch which was knitted after “the make 1” in preceding row.
Repeat from 1st to 22d rows until the required length is worked.

_The Edging of the Afghan._—Cast on 9 stitches.

1st row.—Plain.

2d row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 2, 6 plain.

3d row.—Plain; but in the “make 2” of preceding row knit 1 plain, 1
purl.

4th and 5th rows.—Plain.

6th row.—Slip 1, 2 plain, make 2, 2 together plain, make 2, 6 plain.

7th row.—Plain; but in each “make 2” of last row knit 1 plain, 1 purl.

8th row.—Plain.

9th row.—Cast off 5 stitches, 8 plain.

Repeat from 2d to 9th rows, inclusive, until required length is
reached. Then sew the edging to the border of the Afghan.




INSTRUCTIONS FOR KNITTING

ORIENTAL RUGS AND CARPETS.


Cut the various colors of wool required for the pattern in equal
short bits. Then knit with 11 inch No. 13 needles as follows:

1. THE FIRST ROW flat plain with coarse cotton or twine.

2. THE SECOND ROW one stitch plain; then take a piece of wool and
knit it in with the next stitch, so that one half of it is at the
front and the other half at the back of the work; then one plain
again, and put the half left at the back round to the front of the
work, and continue this alternately to the end of the row. Knit ONE
ROW PLAIN again, then ONE ROW SAME AS THE SECOND, and so on.

The Carpet may be knitted in pieces of any size and sewn together. If
the surface is not quite level cut it even afterwards.

The best results are obtained by using Oriental Wool, Smyrna
Cotton and designs manufactured expressly for the purpose and
lately introduced into this market by Messrs. H. Taylor & Co., of
Philadelphia. Rugs knitted from these materials are as beautiful and
serviceable as the real Oriental Carpets, and, if well done, cannot
be distinguished from them.




                        BOOKS ON FANCY WORK.

                           CROCHET SERIES.

                            FIVE NUMBERS.


CONTENTS:

No. 1.—HOW TO CROCHET.

  With full explanations of all Crochet Stitches. Illustrated.

No. 2.—LAMBREQUIN DESIGNS.

  Especially adapted for Twine. Illustrated.

No. 3.—MISCELLANEOUS DESIGNS.

  Tidies, Mats and Spreads. Illustrated.

No. 4.—FINE CROCHET WORK.

  Designs for Lace Edgings, Insertions, etc. Illustrated.

No. 5.—MALTESE CROCHET WORK.

  And Designs for Fringes, Afghans, etc. Illustrated.

                        Price, 15 Cents each.

                             DRAWN WORK.

           Complete directions in one volume. Illustrated.

                          =Price, 25 Cents.=

  Complete Crochet Series, 5 Books,      60 cents
  Drawn Work and Crochet Series,         75   ”

          FOR SALE BY DEALERS IN ART NEEDLE WORK MATERIALS.

                      HENRY BRISTOW, PUBLISHER,
                           BROOKLYN, N. Y.




                           [Illustration]

                          NONOTUCK SILK CO.

                        SOLE MANUFACTURERS OF

                           [Illustration]

                     “CORTICELLI” AND “FLORENCE”

                           [Illustration]

      CORTICELLI SPOOL SILK, _Embroidery Silk, Filoselle, &c._,
                           ARE UNEQUALED.

                           [Illustration]

                      Florence Silk Underwear,
                       Florence Silk Hosiery,
                   TRADE [Illustration: “F”] MARK.

                         GUARANTEED MADE OF

               “FLORENCE,” The Peerless Knitting Silk.

                           [Illustration]

                            ----MILLS,----
                     _FLORENCE AND LEEDS, MASS._

                             FOR SALE BY
                           LEADING DEALERS.

                           [Illustration]




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE


  Illustrations in this eBook have been positioned at the start of the
  section referencing them.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Some hyphens in words have been silently removed, some added,
  when a predominant preference was found in the original book.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg. 28: “durl” replaced with “purl”
  Pg. 29: No. 40 4th round, the first “3” is unclear. It might
            be an 8 or 5. Three was validated with test swatch.
  Pg. 73: “pearl” replaced with “purl”






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK KNITTING ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


