The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Templeton case
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Templeton case

Author: Victor L. Whitechurch

Release date: March 20, 2025 [eBook #75669]

Language: English

Original publication: United States: Edward J. Clode, Inc, 1924

Credits: Brian Raiter


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEMPLETON CASE ***


The Templeton Case

by Victor L. Whitechurch

published by Edward J. Clode, Inc. (New York)



CONTENTS

     I. Reginald Templeton Comes to Marsh Quay
    II. The Visit to the Opposite Shore
   III. A Terrible Discovery
    IV. What Canon Fittleworth Found on the “Firefly”
     V. Detective-Sergeant Colson Discovers Clues
    VI. Colson is Baffled
   VII. The Inquest
  VIII. Winnie Cotterill Pays a Visit to Frattenbury
    IX. The Cigar Band
     X. Harold Grayson is Detained
    XI. The Canon’s Cigars
   XII. Fresh Evidence
  XIII. Isaac Moss Explains
   XIV. Reginald Templeton’s Letter
    XV. Detective-Sergeant Colson’s Deductions
   XVI. Mr. Proctor Upsets Matters
  XVII. New Theories
 XVIII. Sir James Perrivale’s Story
   XIX. Colson Makes an Appointment
    XX. Colson’s “Imagination”
   XXI. Final Solution of the Problem



CHAPTER I

Reginald Templeton Comes to Marsh Quay

Tom Gale leaned heavily on the low bulwarks of the little schooner
_Lucy_, his arms folded upon the aforesaid bulwarks, his short, black
clay pipe in his mouth, and his eyes fixed on the flowing tide
glittering in the sunlight of a clear October day.

Tom Gale had nothing whatever to do, and was doing it well, lounging
and thinking, for the most part, about nothing at all. He combined the
offices of crew and cook of the little coasting schooner that was
moored at the head of Marsh Quay, waiting for a load of gravel that
was delayed. That very morning word had been brought that the
contractor would not be able to cart the gravel from the pit, about
three miles away, down to Marsh Quay until the following Tuesday. This
was Saturday, and the “captain” and “mate” had incontinently taken
themselves off to their respective homes at Frattenbury, leaving Tom
Gale in charge.

Tom Gale did not in the least mind having nothing to do beyond taking
care of a vessel that nobody was likely to run away with. There was
good beer to be had at the “Mariner’s Arms,” not a hundred yards away,
and there was a nice snug bar parlour in the “Mariner’s Arms,” where
the evenings might be spent in comfort—for there was no risk in
deserting the vessel for an hour or two.

Marsh Quay was on one of the little estuaries of the sea that pierced
into the southern country from the Channel. Two miles northward, the
grey, tapering spire of the Cathedral of Frattenbury stood out against
the background of Downs and blue sky. The estuary, which ran up within
a mile of Frattenbury to the westward, was at Marsh Quay only about
two hundred yards in width, but broadened out southward until a curve
hid its course towards the open sea.

Marsh Quay, as its name implied, was a little quay jutting out into
the estuary from the eastern shore. It was only about fifty yards
long, but fairly broad, and contained sheds for storage on either
side, except at the end, where it was quite open for a space, which
formed room for a small vessel to be moored on either side, as well as
one at its extremity.

The quay was reached by a straight road of about half a mile, which
turned out of the main road to Frattenbury, and ended abruptly on the
quay itself. As one approached by this road one passed a few cottages
on either side, while, just before one came to the quay itself, there
was a good-sized house on the right, and the “Mariner’s Arms” on the
left. The seaward wall of the little inn was washed at the base at
spring tides, and the windows looked out over the estuary.

On the right-hand side of the quay, screened by the buildings on it,
was an anchorage for vessels of small draught at low tide. A couple of
little yachts were riding here, while, drawn up on the shore, were two
or three flat-bottomed light canoes and some small boats. Most of
these belonged to the “Mariner’s Arms,” and were for hire, Marsh Quay
being quite a little resort at high tide in summer, when Frattenbury
people came out to fish, or to sail in the estuary.

On the shore immediately opposite was a wood, coming right down to the
water’s edge, already turning golden yellow with autumn tints. Above
the trees of this wood, a few hundred yards inland, could be seen the
upper part of a house to which a boat, moored to the tiny jetty
opposite, evidently belonged.

At low tide the estuary was a wide expanse of black mud, except for a
narrow channel winding in the middle, and the little pool beside the
quay, which formed the anchorage. The tide from the Channel outside
came in with a strong current which rushed back at the turn. Boating
was not particularly safe, and even if one were sailing a light
draught yacht, one had to know the shallows well, while heavier
vessels coming up or going down with the tide had to stick to the
mid-channel, to avoid running on the mud.

The _Lucy_ was moored at the end of the quay, her bows pointing
southward. It was almost high tide, still coming in, with only the
vestige of a breeze from the south-west. As Tom, Gale gazed vacantly
over the sparkling waters, a speck of white appeared, coming into view
round the bend. His seaman’s interest was aroused. Slowly he stretched
himself into an upright position, and shaded his eyes with his hand.

Presently he muttered to himself:

“’Tain’t the first time he’s come up. Knows his way about, or he
wouldn’t ha’ steered off the point there.”

The speck of white grew more distinct, evolving into the mainsail,
foresail, and jib of a small, cutter-rigged yacht. She was making
little more than tide-way, her sails every now and then flapping as
the breeze dropped.

Tom Gale took a look round. The water was flowing by more slowly, the
floating bits of seaweed hardly moving now.

“Reckon he can’t do it,” he said. “There ’ent wind enough to bring him
up against this tide and it’s almost on the ebb now.”

Even as he spoke, the foresail came down with a run, followed by the
jib. Then the mainsail slowly descended.

“What’s he up to?” said Tom Gale. “Don’t seem to know his way about
arter all. If he drops anchor there he’ll drag for a certainty and get
on the mud. Much better ha’ slipped back to Langham on the tide. Ah—I
see.”

For the yacht suddenly began to forge ahead, while a faint succession
of thudding sounds came over the water.

“One of them auxiliary oil engines, that’s it.”

Gathering speed, the yacht came up the estuary, stemming the
outflowing tide. Tom Gale could see two men on her now, one steering
and the other stowing the sails.

Presently she came up near the quay, slowing down a bit, and Tom Gale,
looking down, could make out both men plainly. The one engaged in
stowing the sails had moved forward and was getting the anchor ready.
He was evidently a sailor, and wore dark blue trousers and a jersey,
with a peaked cap on his head. The other was a man who looked about
fifty years of age, with moustache and short, iron-grey beard. His
face was much tanned by exposure to weather. He wore dark trousers, a
short reefer jacket, and a yachtsman’s cap was tilted on the back of
his head. As he passed beneath the schooner he looked up, caught Tom’s
eye, and shouted:

“Plenty of room round the quay?”

“Plenty o’ room, sir,” answered Tom, “but stand out a bit to get
round—it’s runnin’ a smart pace.”

“I remember,” the other shouted back, with the air of one who was
familiar with the estuary.

Tom Gale slowly paced the deck of the schooner to get a better view
aft. He watched the little craft draw up to her anchorage; she was a
smart little boat, painted white, with a green line round her just
below the bulwarks, and Tom’s practised eye saw that she had been
painted quite recently. Abaft the raised cabin was a well, in which
the steersman sat and controlled the engine, and the entrance to this
cabin the doors of which were open, was from this well. Forward was a
forecastle, evidently providing just room for a solitary “crew.”

Tom Gale watched her as she came to her anchorage. In this pool, cut
off, as it were, by the side of the quay, the water was scarcely
affected by the flow of the tide. There was a splash as the anchor was
heaved overboard, a rattle of the chain, and the yacht slowly swung to
her moorings.

The interest dwindled. Tom Gale pulled out a big silver watch. It was
one o’clock.

“Time for a pint, I reckon,” he murmured.

Slowly and heavily he climbed over the bulwarks and walked along the
quay to the “Mariner’s Arms.” A stout, pleasant-looking, rosy-cheeked
woman was standing behind the little bar, polishing glasses. To her he
nodded with the air of an old acquaintance, kept up by frequent
visitations.

“Gimme a pint, please, missus.”

She drew it out of a big cask that stood on trestles behind the bar.

“Weather keeps fine.”

“Ah—not much to grumble at,” he replied as he counted out coppers.
“Anyone in the parlour?”

“Only the gentleman that’s staying here.”

“Who’s he?”

She shook her head.

“Dunno. An artist. Leastways, he does a bit o’ paintin’—and fishin’
too,” she added. “Been with me nearly a week now. Nice quiet young
man. Don’t give no trouble.”

“I’ll have a look at ’im.”

“Ah, do.”

Tom Gale moved across the bar, opened a door, and passed into the
parlour that overlooked the estuary. As has been said, the bar parlour
of the “Mariner’s Arms” was snug and cosy. Also it was in harmony with
its name and surroundings. Five models of ships stood on the broad
mantelpiece, and the pictures consisted of oleographs of the departure
of Nelson from Portsmouth Hard on his last voyage, his death at
Trafalgar, and three or four ocean liners, and a brigantine under full
canvas sailing on an impossible blue sea. The furniture was homely but
solid, and a comfortable settee stretched along one side of the room.

Seated near the window, his unfinished glass of beer on the table by
his side, was a young man of about five and twenty, smoking a cigar.
He was clean-shaven, with fair hair rather inclined to curl, a firm,
strong mouth, and clear blue eyes. He was dressed in a loose
knickerbocker suit, and was wearing a soft turned-down collar.

Tom Gale touched his cap, and then awkwardly removed it as he sat down
and put his mug of beer on the table.

“Good afternoon, sir.”

“Good afternoon.”

Tom Gale took a long pull at his beer. He was a sociable man.

“Nice weather, sir.”

“It is, very.”

“Doin’ a bit of fishing, Mrs. Yates tells me.”

The young man flicked the ash off his cigar, and smiled.

“Trying to,” he said, “but I haven’t had any particular luck, so far.”

Tom Gale thereupon waxed garrulous on the subject. He knew the estuary
well and was up to all kinds of fishing dodges. From fishing the
conversation turned to sailing, and from sailing narrowed down to the
yacht that had just anchored.

“Did you see her, sir?”

“I was watching her just now, before you came in.”

“Little beauty, I call her. I reckon she could give points to a few in
a smart breeze. Looks to me like one o’ they Cowes boats. Never seen
her up here before, but the skipper knowed the way right enough.
’Tain’t the first time he’s run up to Marsh Quay, I’ll ’low. Handled
her just right.”

“Well, _you_ ought to know,” said the other with a laugh.

“Ah—reckon I does. Though I ain’t had no chance o’ sailin’ a beauty
like that. Nice thing to have nothin’ to do, and a craft like her to
do it in. One o’ these here rich chaps, I expects, what can afford to
live in luxury and have their wine and whisky and cigars whenever they
pleases.”

The young man had just drawn out his case, and was selecting a fresh
cigar as Tom was speaking. He held out his case with a laugh.

“Don’t be jealous of his cigars,” he said; “have one of mine, if you
like ’em.”

“Thank ’ee, sir. I don’t mind if I do. Not that I often smokes
one—don’t get the chance.”

He took out a knife, opened it, and was about to cut the cigar, then
hesitated.

“I’ll save it till to-morrow, if you don’t mind, sir. I always reckon
a cigar’s a Sunday smoke.”

“All right,” said the other, as he removed the band from his own cigar
and threw it in the grate. The fire was ready laid, but the weather
was warm and it had not been lighted.

Tom Gale stowed away his cigar in his pocket, drained his mug, and
glanced out of the window.

“Hallo!” he said, “they’re coming ashore.”

“Who?”

“Gentleman from the yacht—and his man.”

From the window they could see the yacht. A little dinghy was coming
ashore, pulled by the sailor. As the bows grated on the stones he
sprang out, took a bundle from the boat, waited till the other had
moved into his seat and taken the oars, and then shoved her off again.

“Skipper gone back to the yacht,” said Tom, who was still watching.
“T’other coming along for a drink—if I knows a sailor man rightly.”

Five minutes later the said sailor man entered the parlour, a mug of
beer in his hand.

“What cheer, mate! Good day, sir,” as he caught sight of the other.

The two men of a trade quickly forgathered together, while the other
quietly smoked his cigar and now and then put in a word.

“Stroke o’ luck for me,” said the newcomer, with all the open
frankness of his calling. “I ain’t been this way this three year or
more. Got an old uncle living over at Frattenbury, and the skipper’s
given me the night off to go and see him. Got to get back early
to-morrow to get his breakfast for him.”

“What, does he sleep aboard?” asked Tom Gale.

“Always, ever since I’ve been with him, and that’s gettin’ on for
three weeks now. Don’t like hotels, he says. Ain’t been used to ’em.
Been livin’ up country in Africa or somewhere—explorer cove,
seemingly. Knows his way about.”

“How long is he puttin’ in here?”

“Three or four days, I reckon. Knows Frattenbury; got a relative
there, I think.”

“How about his dinner to-night?” asked the young man. “Is he seeing to
it himself?”

“No, sir. Goin’ to walk into Frattenbury presently and have it there,
he says. Comin’ back to-night.”

“Got a soft job, ain’t ye?” asked Tom Gale with a broad grin.

“’Tain’t bad. But he’s mighty particular.”

“Where did you pick him up?”

“Why, he only landed at Plymouth a month ago; came straight on to
Salcombe for yachtin’—mad on it. My governor there hired him the boat
and picked me out to see to him. We’ve been runnin’ along the coast,
putting in at Dartmouth, Weymouth, and Poole. Left Ryde early this
mornin’, then the wind dropped. Ah, he ain’t a bad sort, ain’t Mr.
Templeton.”

And he buried his face in his mug, and then wiped his mouth with the
back of his hand.

The young man leaned forward a little in his chair.

“Did you say his name was Templeton?” he asked.

“That’s right, sir; Mr. Reginald Templeton. It’s painted on one of his
trunks.”

“And he came from Africa?”

“That’s correct sir.”

“And he’s staying here several days?”

“Yes, sir. Well, I must be off. Good afternoon, sir. Come into the bar
and have one with me afore I go,” he went on to Tom Gale.

The latter obeyed the call with ponderous alacrity. The young man
remained smoking thoughtfully. Presently the landlady came in to clear
away the mugs from the table.

“Lor’ sir,” she said, “ain’t you goin’ out paintin’ this beautiful
afternoon?”

He shook his head.

“I’m not in the mood,” he said.

“Well, sir, why don’t you try a bit o’ fishin’? There’s whitin’ to be
caught off the quay head when the tide’s ebbin’. And you’d get a bit
o’ bait off of Harry Turner, the second cottage down the road. I know
he’s got some.”

“No, thank you, Mrs. Yates, I’m going up to my room. I’ve some letters
to write.”

His bedroom was over the bar parlour. When he reached it he looked out
of the window.

He took a pipe from his pocket, filled and lighted it. But he seemed
to have forgotten his letters. Instead of writing, he sat by the
window, carefully watching to see if Mr. Templeton came ashore.



CHAPTER II

The Visit to the Opposite Shore

Tom Gale, with the comfortable sensation of the replenishment of his
inner man with a double portion of his favourite beverage, went back
on board the _Lucy_ and resumed his attitude of leaning over the
bulwarks and gazing upon the estuary. Only, this time, he was aft of
the schooner instead of forward.

The tide had gone down rapidly, and great patches of slimy black mud
were showing on either side of the central current. Opposite, just
southward of the small landing-stage where the boat was moored, a
stony patch ran out into the estuary, banking up the water on the
northern side. This made it possible, except at extreme low water, to
cross in a small boat from shore to shore without running on the mud.

As Tom Gale puffed at his short pipe he was attracted by a noise from
the yacht. Looking towards it, he observed that Templeton was hauling
the dinghy alongside.

“Goin’ ashore,” murmured Tom.

Templeton got into the dinghy, cast her off, took the oars, and began
rowing across the estuary. To do this he had to head the boat
diagonally upstream and to pull with all his might athwart the
current. Slowly he crossed over, Tom Gale grunting approval, till he
reached the little pool of comparatively calm water formed by the
stony patch. Here he got out, took the anchor, hitched it round a big
stone, and shoved off the boat to the full length of her painter. Then
he walked briskly up the shore and disappeared into the wood—towards
the house.

The young man watching from the window of the “Mariner’s Arms” had
seen Templeton cross over.

He put on his hat, came downstairs and strolled out on the quay. Then
he stepped aboard the _Lucy_, and began to talk to Tom Gale.

Presently he asked, nonchalantly:

“Who lives in that house beyond the trees yonder?” pointing to the
opposite shore.

Tom Gale, who had been up and down the estuary scores of times, and
was a confirmed gossip, answered readily:

“Over there? Oh, he’s a London chap. Name o’ Moss—Isaac Moss. He’s a
Jew, so they say.”

“Ont-of-the-way place, eh?”

“He only comes down for week-ends. That’s his craft—yonder,” and he
nodded towards one of the little yachts lying near the newcomer. “Has
to keep her over this side, but rows across when he wants her. She’s
stowed for the winter now, I reckon. Lord, _he_ can’t sail her, sir.
Has a man to do it for him.”

“What is he?”

“Dunno. Something up in London. Reg’lar Jew, sir. Come walkin’ out
from Frattenbury one Saturday I was here—his motor had gone wrong, and
couldn’t run in to fetch him. Asked me to pull him across when a
smartish tide was runnin’, and give me thruppence for it. Look—that’s
him,” and he pointed to the other side, where two men were coming out
of the wood to the shore. “T’other’s the skipper comin’ back I
reckon.”

Templeton, for it was he, drew the dinghy ashore, stepped into her,
and began to row across. The other, a small man, stood on the shore,
apparently still talking to him.

The young man, who had been sitting on the bulwarks, rose, left the
schooner, and walked back to the inn. From the window he again took up
his watch. This time he was successful. Templeton, having boarded his
yacht for a few minutes, pulled himself ashore, dragged the dinghy a
little way out of the water and made her painter fast to a stump of
wood. Then he began walking briskly over the field path that led to
Frattenbury.

By this time it was well on in the afternoon. The young man came down,
had his tea, and then strolled out. For some time he stood at the
entrance to the quay looking at the yacht. The latter was only about
twenty yards from the shore, and he could clearly make out the name on
her bows—the _Firefly_.

Later on Tom Gale found a little company assembled in the bar parlour,
and spent a pleasant, and somewhat beery, evening. At ten o’clock Mrs.
Yates gently but firmly turned them all out. The little group stood
talking for a few minutes in the road, and then separated. The night
was very dark, but Tom Gale was accustomed to dark nights at sea.
Mechanically observant, he could make out the dim shape of the dinghy,
already half afloat on the flowing tide, while the outline of the
yacht, riding at anchor, was just discernible. There were no lights
showing on it.

“Skipper ain’t come back yet; he’ll have a dark, lonesome kind o’ walk
from Frattenbury,” he said to himself as he made his way along the
quay. Arrived on board the _Lucy_, he dived into the forecastle,
lighted a candle, closed the hatch—he liked fuggy surroundings—removed
his jacket, guernsey and trousers, rolled into his bunk, blew out the
light, and in a few minutes was sleeping the heavy sleep of the
saturated.

The tide rippled up the estuary. The lights in the “Mariner’s Arms”
and the cluster of cottages went out. Marsh Quay and its surroundings
were still and quiet in the calm autumn night.



CHAPTER III

A Terrible Discovery

Jim Webb, “crew” of the yacht _Firefly_, came walking briskly over the
fields from Frattenbury the next morning. In the clear autumn air he
heard the Cathedral chimes strike the half-hour, and compared the time
with his watch. Half-past seven. His skipper breakfasted at half-past
eight, so there was plenty of time for him to prepare the meal with
the help of the little oil-stove in his cuddy.

It was only a few minutes later when he reached Marsh Quay. Mrs.
Yates, who was standing at the open door of the “Mariner’s Arms,”
greeted him with a “Good morning,” which he returned.

The tide was out and the yacht rode at anchor in calm water. Moored to
her stern was her dinghy, and Webb had to get aboard.

Mrs. Yates, who was a good-natured woman, had come out of the inn and
strolled down to where he was standing by the water’s edge.

“You’ll be getting your master’s breakfast, I suppose,” she said. “If
you want any hot water, I’ve got a kettle on the fire.”

“Thankee kindly, missis, but there’s a stove abord. Tell you what,
though, I’ll have to borrow one of these punts. I suppose that’ll be
all right?”

“You’re welcome. These here belong to me, and a nuisance they are at
times. The boys will get playing about with them. Look here—they’ve
been at it again, the young rascals! I know this one was tied up all
right yesterday.” And she pointed to one which was unsecured to a
post. “Them boys are the plague of my life,” she went on, as Webb
dragged the little craft down to the water and shoved off.

She stood, arms akimbo, watching him as he paddled the few strokes
that brought him to the yacht. As he clambered aboard he waved his
hand to her, and at that moment he noticed behind her the young man
who had been in the bar parlour the previous evening push a bicycle,
with a stuffed holdall strapped to it, and go quickly riding away
along the road.

Mrs. Yates still stood looking out over the great expanse of mud that
characterised the estuary at low tide. It was a pleasant morning, and
she had nothing particular to do just then.

Turning, she stopped for a minute or two to tighten the painter of one
of the other boats, and then began to walk slowly back to her house.
Suddenly she stopped. A hoarse cry rang out over the water behind her.
Turning once more, she saw Webb frantically climbing from the yacht
into the canoe, shouting incoherently as he did so.

She ran to the shore to meet him as he landed.

“What’s the matter?”

“Him—Mr. Templeton!” he cried as he staggered ashore.

“What?”

“Dead!”

“_Dead?_ What do you mean?”

“Yes—dead! I found him lying there in the cabin—on the floor.”

“But—but—surely——”

“I tell you he’s dead!” cried the man; “and what’s more, he’s been
murdered!”

“Oh, my God!” ejaculated Mrs. Yates, sitting down on one of the posts.
“What do you mean?”

“What I say. The cabin door was open, but I didn’t take no notice o’
that. He always sleeps with plenty o’ fresh air about. At first I
thought he’d tumbled out of his bunk and stunned himself—till I saw
something else on the floor—blood it was, missis. Then I took a closer
look at him, and saw he was stone dead! Lyin’ on his face, he is—and
the blood all round him.”

“Where—whereabouts was he hurt?”

“I dunno; I never stayed to see. What be I to do, missis? This is a
case for the police, and——”

“What’s the matter? What is a case for the police?”

They turned quickly. Coming out of the garden gate of the house
opposite the “Mariner’s Arms” was a little elderly man, with a
perfectly bald head and clean-shaven face, like an egg. He was dressed
in a loose velveteen jacket and grey flannel trousers, and wore a
gaudy pair of woollen slippers.

“What the matter?”

“Oh, Mr. Proctor!” almost screamed Mrs. Yates, “I’m so glad you’ve
come. It’s murder, sir!”

“Mr. Templeton, sir,” cried Webb; “he’s been done to death—over
there—on the yacht. I’ve just found him——”

“Steady, my man, steady. Try and keep calm and tell me all about it.
If it’s what you say, there’s no time to be lost.”

Under the quieting influence of the old gentleman, Jim Webb retold his
ghastly story; Mr. Proctor pursing up his little round mouth, nodding
encouragingly and now and then helping him out with a word or a
question. Then he took complete command of the case.

“Someone must go to Frattenbury at once and tell the police, and bring
a doctor.”

“There’s the young man what’s lodging with me—Mr. Grayson,” exclaimed
the landlady. “He’s just ridin’ his bicycle into Frattenbury.”

“He’s gone,” said Webb. “I seen him go just as I was gettin’ aboard.”

“Gone!” cried Mrs. Yates, “and never said good-bye to me?”

“What,” said Mr. Proctor, “is he leaving for good?”

“Yes, sir. All of a sudden like. Came down an hour earlier for his
breakfast and asked for his bill. I couldn’t make it out.”

“Well, well,” replied Mr. Proctor. “Time enough to talk about him
later. My young great-nephew is staying with me, and he’s got a
bicycle. I’ll send him into Frattenbury at once. He’s a sharp lad.
Phil,” he cried, turning to the house, “Phil, come here at once. Look
sharp.”

A bright-looking boy of about fifteen came running up. Mr. Proctor
gave him hasty instructions. “Ride as hard as you can,” he said.

“Righto, uncle. I’ll do it in ten minutes.”

“Good boy. Now, my man are you quite certain your master is dead?”

“Yes, sir—there ain’t no doubt about it.”

“Um—all the same, I’ll go and have a look. You can pull me out.”

Mrs. Yates waited on the shore till he returned, shaking his head.

“There’s no doubt about it, I’m afraid. We can’t do any more. I
haven’t moved anything. Best let the police find things just as they
are. You two come into my house and have something. You’re both
scared, that’s what you are.”

He took them in and gave them a brandy and soda each. When they came
out again the news spread rapidly, and a group of men, women and
children gathered on the shore and gazed at the yacht. Tom Gale came
along the quay, munching the remains of his breakfast. Mr. Proctor
nudged Jim Webb’s arm just as the latter was about to tell the story
to an expectant audience.

“If you’ll take my advice, my man,” he said, “you’ll say nothing. Wait
till the police come, and let them take the lead.”

Jim Webb accordingly lighted his pipe and remained dumb, much to the
annoyance of the little crowds, the members of which began to
speculate upon what had happened, and finally determined, to their
great satisfaction, that Webb himself had committed the murder and
that Mr. Proctor was keeping an eye upon him till the police arrived
to arrest him. One of them even suggested to the latter:

“Hadn’t we better lock him up in Mrs. Yates’s cellar, sir?”

“Lock who up?”

“Why, _him_,” pointing a condemnatory thumb over his shoulder at the
unconscious Webb.

“Lock yourself up for a silly fool,” retorted Mr. Proctor
contemptuously.

Presently a motor appeared dashing down the road. It was driven by the
superintendent of the police. By his side was the doctor, and in the
back seat a burly constable and a man in plain clothes. They all
jumped out. Mr. Proctor, who was still in supreme command, addressed a
few words to the superintendent.

“You’ve done quite right, sir—quite right,” said the latter; “and now
we’ll get on with things at once.”

The superintendent was a quiet, refined-looking man, with a big black
moustache. The man in plain clothes was of slight build, clean shaven,
alert, and with shrewd grey eyes.

“Now, sergeant,” said the superintendent, “you and I will go aboard
with the doctor.” He went on, turning to the constable, “You stay
here. We shall want you, my man” he added, addressing Jim Webb.
“What’s your name?”

“Webb, sir.”

“Told you so,” said the man who had been snubbed by Mr. Proctor. “They
always confront ’em with their victims. Why don’t he put the handcuffs
on him?”

A boat was run down to the water, and Webb pulled them out to the
yacht.

The cabin was small. Webb, at the command of the superintendent,
stayed outside, while the three men squeezed their way in. It was just
the ordinary saloon of a small yacht. There was a bunk on either side,
with lockers beneath and a folding-table, fixed to the floor, ran
half-way down the centre. Huddled up to the floor, on his face, was
the body of Reginald Templeton.

The doctor went down on his knees by his side and made a careful
investigation.

“Stabbed in the back,” he said presently, “and whoever did it knew the
right place—right through the heart, as far as I can see. He must have
fallen just as he is, and died instantaneously.”

“How long has he been dead?” asked the superintendent.

The doctor went on with his examination, and consulted his watch.

“Some hours,” he replied. “Rigor mortis has begun to set in. I should
say it might have been after midnight—probably before. I should like
to make a complete examination later on. Can’t we have him moved to
the inn?”

“That will be best,” replied the superintendent. “We’ll see about
that.”

“There’s a motor just come,” said Webb from the deck.

“That’s mine,” said the doctor. “I told my man to follow us out. I’ll
get back now, but I’ll be down again later in the morning. There’s no
more I can do at present.”

“All right. Colson,” went on the superintendent to the detective,
“you’d like to stay aboard and investigate a bit?”

“Yes, sir. I want a good look round. And I prefer working alone.”

The superintendent took a last searching glance round the cabin.

“Webb!”

“Yes, sir?”

Webb put his head in at the doorway.

“That lamp,” and he pointed to an oil-lamp swinging from the ceiling.
“It’s burning. Did you light it when you came aboard?”

“No, sir. I never noticed it.”

“Very well. Now pull me ashore, please.”

“Mr. Proctor,” he said when he came ashore and the doctor had
departed, “may we go into your house? I want to ask Webb some
questions.”

“By all means, Superintendent. Come along in. Have you had breakfast
yet?”

“Yes, thanks.”

“How about you, Webb?”

“I had some at Frattenbury, sir.”

“Well, I’ll leave you,” said Mr. Proctor as he took them into his
dining-room.

“Don’t do that,” said the superintendent. “You may be able to help us.
Now then, Webb,” and he took out his notebook.

“Yes, sir.”

“Where’s your home?”

“Thirty-one, Fore Street, Salcombe, sir.”

“You’re a sailor?”

“I work for Mr. Jefferies, sir. He lets out boats. He hired the
_Firefly_ to Mr. Templeton—Mr. Reginald Templeton, sir.”

“When?”

“Three weeks ago.”

“You’ve been with him ever since?”

“Yes, sir,” and he recapitulated what he had told Tom Gale in the inn
parlour.

“Who was Mr. Templeton?”

“He’d just come from Africa, sir. I reckon, from what he said, he’d
been exploring or something. But he didn’t talk much. He knew how to
handle a boat, sir.”

“I see. And you visited all these places?”

“Yes.”

“Do you know if he had any particular reason for coming here?”

“I think he had, sir.”

“Why?”

“He asked from the first whether I knew the coast. I said I did. I’ve
an uncle in Frattenbury, sir. And I’ve sailed in these parts several
times. He seemed pleased when I told him this.”

“Anything else?”

Webb thought a moment.

“He mentioned he’d be here some days, sir. Said he had business. Said
he was expected.”

“Who by?”

“I can’t say, sir. Only——”

“Yes?”

“When we was in Weymouth he gave me a letter to post—and, well——”

“You read the address?”

“Well, yes, sir.”

“Very well. What was it?”

“To a parson in Frattenbury, sir. A reverend gentleman, name of
Fittlemore—or something like that.”

“Fittleworth?” asked the superintendent sharply.

“That’s it, sir; Fittleworth was the name.”

“Canon Fittleworth,” said the other. “Well, that’s a help, anyhow. Now
tell me about last night.”

Webb told him how he had had leave to stay in Frattenbury, and that
Templeton had mentioned he was going to dine there. A few more
questions, and the superintendent glanced over his notes.

“Well,” he said, “there’ll be an inquest, of course, and we shall want
you, Webb. What are you thinking of doing?”

Webb hesitated.

“I don’t much fancy sleeping alone on the _Firefly_, sir. I could get
a bed at the inn here, or my uncle at Frattenbury will put me up.”

“All right, so long as you keep in touch with us. That’s all for the
present. Thank you very much, Mr. Proctor. You can go, Webb.”

Mr. Proctor rose from his chair, crossed the room and showed Webb out
of the door. Then he took down a box from the shelf.

“Can I offer you a cigar, Superintendent?”

“Thanks very much.” The policeman lighted his cigar, looked over his
notes for a few minutes, and then said: “You’re a good judge of
cigars, Mr. Proctor.”

“I am,” replied the little man with a smile. “This is a strange case.”

“Um,” said the superintendent. “It’s too early to form an opinion yet.
But one thing is fairly obvious. Whoever murdered Mr. Templeton must
have known he was coming here and must have got out to that yacht
after he returned from Frattenbury and was aboard her.”

Mr. Proctor flicked the ash from the cigar he was smoking, and
observed dryly:

“Or have got aboard first, and waited for him there.”

“What makes you say that?” asked the superintendent, looking up
quickly.

“Only because it’s just as obvious as your own theory. I thought it
might be worth considering.”

The superintendent reflected for a minute.

“Yes—it is,” he admitted. “Now I must be going. I shall be back
shortly.”

Before he finally left for Frattenbury he pulled out to the _Firefly_
and had a few words with the detective-sergeant.

“When you’ve finished here,” he said, “you’d better make a few
inquiries on shore. Find out who owns the boats about here. One of
them must have been used by the murderer, otherwise the dinghy
wouldn’t have been here. Get to work among the people, and make a note
of them, or of any strangers. I’m off to see the coroner. Also I’ve
discovered that Templeton was probably dining with Canon Fittleworth
last night. At any rate, he knew him. I’ll bring the Canon back with
me if he’s able to come.”

“Right, sir. I’ll do what I can.”

After a last injunction to the constable on the shore, the
superintendent entered his motor and drove off.

“He ain’t took that ’ere man back with him, after all,” said the
disappointed spectator who had fixed the crime onto the unfortunate
Jim Webb. “And that’s what we pays our police for!”



CHAPTER IV

What Canon Fittleworth Found on the “Firefly”

Canon Fittleworth had only just returned to his house in the Close
from the early Sunday service in the Cathedral, and had sat down to
his breakfast with his wife and daughter. He was a cheerful-looking
ecclesiastic, apparently midway between forty and fifty, wearing
pince-nez over a pair of keen brown eyes.

He had just answered a question put by his daughter, and was beginning
to attack his egg, when a servant came in.

“If you please, sir, Superintendent Norton wishes to speak to you. He
says it’s very particular. I’ve shown him into the study, sir.”

“The police!” exclaimed Doris Fittleworth. “What have you been doing,
father?”

“I’ve quite a clear conscience, dear. Tell him to wait ten minutes,”
he added to the servant.

“Please, sir, he said he must see you at once,” she replied.

“Oh, very well,” said the Canon, not pleased to be interrupted at his
meal. “Keep my toast warm,” he added to his wife as he went out of the
room.

“Good morning, Superintendent. You wanted to see me!”

“Good morning, sir. I’m sorry to disturb you, but it’s urgent.”

“Anything wrong?”

“I’m afraid so. Will you tell me, please—do you know a Mr. Reginald
Templeton, and have you seen him lately?”

“Why, of course I do. He’s my cousin. He was only dining with me last
evening. I hadn’t seen him for a long time. What is it?”

“I’m very sorry to tell you, Canon, that Mr. Templeton was discovered
on his yacht at Marsh Quay this morning, dead.”

“Dead? Why, he was in the best of health last night!”

“Murdered,” went on the inspector gravely.

The Canon started, and seized both arms of the chair in which he was
seated.

“Good heavens!” he exclaimed. “This is terrible, Superintendent.
Reginald _murdered_, you say?”

Briefly the superintendent gave him the details, explaining how he had
ascertained that the Canon knew the murdered man.

“Exactly. He wrote to me from Weymouth, and again from Ryde. I was
expecting him last night. I hadn’t seen him for six or seven
years—he’d been abroad. I wanted him to stay the night, but he
wouldn’t. He was always keen on boating, and was enjoying the life, he
told me. Would to heaven he _had_ stayed!”

“What time did he leave you?”

“He got here between five and six. We dined early—at seven. He left
about half-past eight.”

“Going straight back to Marsh Quay, I suppose?”

The superintendent had taken out his notebook.

“No, he said he had a call to pay first in Frattenbury.”

“On whom?” asked the other, keenly interested.

“He didn’t say. He was a very reticent man—always. I wondered at the
time, because I didn’t remember that he knew anyone here besides
ourselves.”

“I thought perhaps, Canon, you would like to see him—in fact, I should
wish you to, if you can. I have to see the coroner, then—in about a
quarter of an hour—I can come back and run you down in my car.”

“By all means,” replied the Canon. “I’ll come if you think I can be of
any use.”

“Thank you, Canon, I’m sure it will help us.”

He went out, and the Canon returned to break the terrible news to his
family.

The superintendent drove a little way through the ancient city to a
quiet, Georgian street, and stopped before a solid, square-looking
house, which bore a brass plate on the door with the inscription, “Mr.
F. Norwood, Solicitor.” A minute later he was in the presence of Mr.
Norwood, who rose from his chair to greet him.

Mr. Francis Norwood was one of the best-known professional men in
Frattenbury and its neighbourhood. He had a large and select practice,
an old-established one inherited from his father. He was an
austere-looking man, with a hatchet-shaped face, large nose, thin,
tightly-compressed lips, and old-fashioned mutton-chop whiskers. His
hair, which was inclined to be grey, was thin and carefully parted in
the middle. He wore dark trousers, a black cutaway coat, and black tie
with a small gold pin.

He looked the very epitome of a dry, respectable lawyer, and eminently
suitable for the environment of a cathedral city. He had never
married—people said unkind things about him in this respect—that no
woman would accept such a dry stick of a man—that he was too fond of
himself and too close with his money to risk a partner.

For many years he had held the office of coroner—as his father had
done before him. Many people called him selfish in still holding it.
There were younger and struggling men who would have been glad of the
occasional fees, whereas Francis Norwood was reputed wealthy. But this
criticism—even if he knew it—had no effect upon the staid lawyer. He
stuck to his post and he stuck to the fees which it brought him.

“Good morning, Superintendent; won’t you sit down?” said the lawyer,
motioning the other to a chair, and reseating himself. “What is it?”

“A case of murder, I’m afraid, Mr. Norwood.”

“Murder? Dear, dear! That’s very serious. Tell me about it.”

As the superintendent told his story, the coroner sat bolt upright,
listening intently, his elbows on the arms of his chair, the tips of
his fingers pressed together.

“Yes,” he said, as the other finished, “a bad case—a very bad case.
I’ll open the inquiry to-morrow. We shall have to adjourn it, of
course. Let me see”—and he consulted a pocket diary. “Two o’clock
to-morrow. Will that do?”

“Quite well, Mr. Norwood. It will give us time to get the preliminary
facts in order.”

“Just so. As far as my recollection serves me, there is a public-house
close to the quay?”

“The ‘Mariner’s Arms,’”

“Ah, just so. The inquest will take place there. You will summon a
jury?”

“Certainly.”

The coroner folded his hands again. He was an extremely stiff
individual.

“This will mean a lot of work for you,” he said. “Have you any clue so
far?”

“There’s been no time yet, Mr. Norwood. I left the very best man we’ve
got at Marsh Quay—Detective-Sergeant Colson, an extremely smart
fellow.”

“I see. Exactly. Do you intend to call in the services of Scotland
Yard?”

The superintendent smiled.

“That depends on what the Chief Constable says, Mr. Norwood—when I’ve
made my report to him. But we like, if we can, to get the credit of a
case like this ourselves. And I’ve great confidence in Colson.
However, developments will probably answer your question.”

“Exactly. It’s no affair of mine of course. But I hope you’ll take
every step to find the murderer.”

“You can trust us for that,” replied the other as he rose to go. “Two
o’clock to-morrow, then?”

“Two o’clock to-morrow, Superintendent,” repeated the coroner. “I’ll
be there.”

He accompanied the policeman out of the room and through a big square,
stone-paved hall to the front door, shaking hands with him stiffly and
limply as he left.

A few minutes later, the superintendent was driving Canon Fittleworth
to Marsh Quay. As they reached the spot, he pointed out the _Firefly_.

“Dear me,” said the Canon, “we were to have come over for a sail in
her to-morrow. How terribly sad!”

When they arrived on the yacht they found Colson sitting on deck,
smoking. He hardly looked at them. The superintendent, who knew his
man, took the Canon into the little saloon. The body had been laid on
the table ready for removal; a handkerchief was over the face.

Canon Fittleworth lifted it reverently.

“Poor fellow!” he exclaimed; “it’s Reginald Templeton, of course—poor
fellow!”

He was almost breaking down. The superintendent, a sympathetic and
sensitive man himself, said:

“I’m going to speak to Colson, sir.”

The other nodded. When he was alone he kneeled down, bowed his head,
and prayed silently for a few minutes. Then, without rising, he looked
about him mechanically.

At times of great stress the smallest objects are often noticeable. An
instance of this strange truth occurred just then. The Canon’s gaze
fell on something lying on the floor of the cabin—partly bright red
and partly shining. With a sort of muffled curiosity, he stooped and
picked it up. It was a cigar band.

Now there is nothing particularly striking in a cigar band. It is a
common enough object. True, cigar bands vary in their queer little
heraldic designs and miniature shields, and inscriptions of the firms
that produced them, in Spanish. But, as the Canon looked at that torn
object, he suddenly started.

“That’s queer,” he murmured, smoothing it out and regarding it
intently. He took off his glasses, wiped them with his handkerchief,
and had another look. His brow puckered. Again he said:

“Queer—very queer.”

Now the Canon was entirely ignorant of police methods—they had never
come within his sphere. Also, by virtue of his office and dignity, he
was accustomed to act on his own initiative. Besides, that particular
cigar band had led his thoughts far away from that scene of death—it
was something personal that was arresting his attention. Also, he had
been, all his life, one of those men who are reticent up to a point,
that point being the exact moment when they are ready to lay all their
cards on the table. He wanted to compare this particular bit of red
and gold with something else before he could be quite certain of the
matter that was agitating his mind.

These several reasons combined to prevent him doing what many a man
would have done under similar circumstances—calling in the
superintendent. It never entered his head at that moment that he ought
to do any such thing. Instead, he took out a his pocket-case and
carefully deposited the cigar band within it.

Then he rose from his knees and looked round the cabin, gazed again at
the cold, white face on the table, spread the handkerchief over it,
and slowly left the saloon—a great weight on his mind as the thought
of his murdered cousin pressed itself uppermost. In silence he
rejoined the two policemen on the deck, took his seat in the boat, and
came ashore with them. For the time being the incident of the cigar
band had passed out of his mind.

Mr. Proctor greeted them.

“Canon Fittleworth, I presume?” he asked politely. “My name is
Proctor. May I be allowed to express my sympathy, sir? I understand
the unfortunate gentleman is a relative of yours.”

“Thank you very much.”

“And may I venture to ask you both to come in and have a glass of
sherry and a biscuit? I’m sure you both need something after such a
strain. It will give me much pleasure if you will.”

“It’s very good of you,” said the Canon. “And I won’t refuse.”

The little man took them into a cosy dining-room which overlooked the
estuary. On the table was a plate of sandwiches, biscuits, a decanter
of wine and glasses. He helped them to refreshments and then said:

“If you’ll excuse me—pray make yourselves at home.”

“Thank you,” said the superintendent as Mr. Proctor left the room. He
did not press him to stay, as he wanted a few minutes’ conversation
with Canon Fittleworth.

“We shall have to ask you to give formal evidence of identification at
the inquest to-morrow, Canon. And, of course, you will tell the jury
what you know of Mr. Templeton—and his movements last evening.”

“Certainly. Though, as a matter of fact, I know very little of him. As
I told you, he has been abroad for some years. He’s a bachelor—and was
always a rolling stone. He told us something of his travels last
night—not very much.”

The superintendent nodded. “There are one or two questions I want to
ask, please.”

“By all means.”

“Tell me—do you think Mr. Templeton had any object in coming to Marsh
Quay other than paying you a visit?”

“Yes,” answered the Canon, “I feel sure he had. He spoke vaguely of
having business in the neighbourhood—but I haven’t the slightest idea
what it was—except, yes—now I come to think of it he did drop a hint.”

“What was it?” asked the superintendent, leaning forward.

“He said that ever since he landed in Plymouth he’d been carrying
about something valuable that made him a bit anxious—that he was glad
to be getting rid of.”

“Did he say what it was?”

“No. He only mentioned it casually.”

“H’m,” mused the other, “there may be something in this. It may mean
the motive for the crime—robbery.”

“That is quite possible. I wish he’d told us more.”

“Exactly. One other question. You say he was going to see someone in
Frattenbury last evening——”

“Yes—but I haven’t the slightest idea who it was.”

“I know—but I was going to ask, did he give you a hint of anyone else
he knew in this neighbourhood?”

The Canon thought carefully before he replied:

“Only that, as I said, he referred to some business that he had in
hand here.”

The superintendent was silent. He drank his glass of wine and looked
out of the window. Colson was coming up the garden path. In a few
seconds he entered the room.

“There’s something I must tell you at once, sir.” And he looked at the
Canon.

“Go on,” said the superintendent. “We are speaking in confidence,” he
added.

“Certainly,” said the Canon.

“I’ve just been talking to a man named Gale who was here all day
yesterday. He saw the _Firefly_ come in and anchor, and what’s more he
saw Templeton row himself across to the other side—yonder,” and he
pointed out of the window, “and reappear after about three-quarters of
an hour with a Jew named Moss, who lives in that house you can see
above the trees. He recognised him distinctly, even at that distance.
Then Templeton pulled himself back to the yacht—and afterwards came
ashore here.”

“Good!” exclaimed the superintendent, springing to his feet. “We’ll
interview this man Moss at once.”

“I should like to come too, if I may,” said Canon Fittleworth.

“There’s no reason why you shouldn’t. Ah—Webb is about still. We’ll
get him to row us across. Come along, Colson.”

Arrived on the other side of the estuary, they made their way through
the woody path and in a few minutes came out on an open space where
the house was standing. It was a modern two-storied villa, with a
small garden and a garage.

The superintendent rang the front door bell. The door was opened by a
woman of about five and thirty. Her face paled a little as she saw the
police uniform.

“Does Mr. Moss live here?”

“Yes, sir—when he’s down here for week-ends.”

“Is he in?”

“No, sir.”

“Do you know where we can find him?”

“He’s gone back to London, sir, with Mrs. Moss.”

“Gone back to London, when?”

“This morning, sir—by the early train from Frattenbury. My husband
motored them both into Frattenbury.”

“Do you live here with your husband?”

“Yes, sir. We’re caretakers all the week. I do the cooking, and Mrs.
Moss brings down a maid when they come for week-ends.”

“Is your husband in?”

“Yes, sir—I hope there’s nothing the matter?”

“Nothing for you to disturb yourself about. Will you call your
husband, please, and come back yourself.”

The man who appeared was a little defiant, but the superintendent
cautioned him sharply, and he answered the questions he put—though
rather sullenly.

“You drove your master and mistress into Frattenbury this morning?”

“Yes—I did.”

“At what time?”

“To catch the 7.35 up train.”

“When did you get the order—last night?”

“No—this morning.”

“It must have been very early?”

“Soon after six o’clock.”

“Do they often go up by this Sunday morning train?”

“No, sir—I never knew them do it before. It’s generally on Mondays
they leave—or, leastways, Mr. Moss always does.”

“Do either of you know where he lives in London?”

“Not his private house, sir—we forward any letters that come—or write
to him at his business address.”

“And what’s that?”

“13a, Hatton Garden, sir.”

The superintendent and Colson exchanged significant glances.

“That seems to point out what his trade is,” said the latter.

The superintendent nodded, then he went on with his questions.

“Did your master receive any visitor yesterday afternoon? Now, be
careful, please.”

The woman shot a glance at her husband—who only stared stonily back,
with his hands in his pockets.

“I—I didn’t let anyone in, sir.”

“Oh, you didn’t. But you saw someone?—you must tell me, please.”

“I—I happened to be looking out of the window, sir—and Mr. Moss was
sitting on a chair on the lawn—with another gentleman.”

“What was he like?”

“I couldn’t say, sir. I didn’t notice him particularly. And he had his
back to me.”

“Very well. What time was this?”

“Somewhere between four and five, sir.”

“Anything else?”

“Mr. Moss must have brought him indoors, sir. I heard them talking in
his study, as I came by, but I never saw him.”

“Did you hear anything they said?”

“No, sir—I should scorn to listen.”

The superintendent thought for a moment, then he said:

“Thank you—that’s all.”

The man stepped forward.

“I should like to know if there’s any trouble about, sir. We’re decent
folk, my wife and I, and we don’t want to be mixed up in no
rows—especially if the police are in it.”

“That’s all right, my man—don’t worry. We only wanted to see your
master about this visitor of his. Another time will do very well. Good
day.”

As they walked back to the boat, the Canon remarked:

“We don’t seem to have got very much information here.”

“No, but it’s important,” replied the superintendent, “and we’ve got
to find out why this Mr. Moss left in such a hurry. We’ll very soon
get onto his track.”

Colson nodded thoughtfully, but said nothing. He was a silent man when
at his work—except when he was drawing out information. Then he could
be companionable enough. But he rarely made remarks as to probable or
possible results while he was actually investigating a case.

When they came back to Marsh Quay, Colson was left in charge, and the
constable instructed to warn men for the jury. The body had been
carried over to the “Mariner’s Arms” and laid on a bed in one of Mrs.
Yates’s rooms. The superintendent drove Canon Fittleworth back to
Frattenbury, and then went on to report to Major Renshaw, the Chief
Constable, who lived just outside the city.

That evening, Canon Fittleworth sat in his comfortable study,
discussing the events of the day with his wife and daughter. He put
his hand in his pocket for something, and felt his case there. Then he
remembered.

“Oh!” he said, “that reminds me.”

“What, dear?” asked his wife.

“Wait a minute.”

He got up, unlocked a cabinet, and took out a box of cigars. Then he
produced the red and gold band from his pocket, and carefully compared
it with those on the cigars in the box.

“Look here,” he said, as he went back to his seat; “I found this lying
on the floor in the cabin where poor Reginald was murdered.”

“Poor man,” said his daughter, as she took the cigar band to look at
it; “do you think that he was smoking when he was murdered?”

“No,” said the Canon; “Reginald did not smoke. I offered him a cigar
last night and he refused it. He said he hadn’t smoked for years, and
he disliked it.”

“Oh, daddy,” exclaimed the girl, “you ought to have shown this to the
police!”

“I suppose I ought—yes—I never thought of it. However, I shall bring
it forward at the inquest to-morrow. But there’s something very queer
about it,” he went on.

“What is it, Charles?” asked his wife.

“Why, it’s off one of my own cigars!”

“Off one of your own cigars?” exclaimed his daughter.

“Look for yourself,” and he passed the box over to them.

“But,” said the girl, when they had both compared the band with the
others, “anyone might smoke the same sort of cigar.”

“No, they mightn’t. That’s just the point,” replied the Canon dryly.
“This box was sent to me by my Spanish friend, De Garcia—you remember
him? Well, he wrote to say they are a special brand reserved for the
planters. They never sell them anywhere. What do you think of _that_?”



CHAPTER V

Detective-Sergeant Colson Discovers Clues

“Mrs. Yates,” said Detective-Sergeant Colson, as he finished a modest
meal, served at his request in the “Mariner’s Arms,” “I am thinking of
making my quarters here, at all events till the inquest is over. Can I
have a room?”

“I’m only too glad to have you, sir,” replied the buxom landlady. “I’m
not much given to be afraid, but I don’t like the idea of being alone
in the house with a corpse, and I was thinking of asking a neighbour
to sleep here.”

“You’re a widow, aren’t you?”

“Yes, sir—these six years.”

“Well, I’ll be here to-night. I’m going into Frattenbury presently,
and shall cycle out, probably a bit late.”

“You can have the room Mr. Grayson had, sir. It’s a pleasant one,
above this, looking out over the water.”

“Who is Mr. Grayson?” he asked.

“A young gentleman—an artist—who’s been lodging here nearly a week. He
left early this morning.”

“Oh, did he?” said the detective, lighting his pipe. “This seems a
rare place for people leaving early on Sunday mornings.”

“Eh, sir?”

“Oh, never mind. Tell me about this lodger of yours. What time did he
go away?”

“It was just before the murder was discovered, sir. He came downstairs
early this morning, and said would I get him some breakfast because
he’d suddenly changed his plans and was going away. Seemed strange,
didn’t it, sir? A nice, quiet young gentleman he was, too.”

“How did he go?”

“On his bicycle, sir—same as he came here. Oh, he was a perfect
gentleman, never gave me trouble, and paid up all right.”

The detective had taken out his notebook.

“I wish you’d give me a description of this young man, Mrs. Yates,” he
said.

“Oh, Mr. Colson, sir,” she exclaimed, “you don’t mean to say as how
you think ’twas him as done it?”

The detective laughed.

“Come, come, Mrs. Yates,” he said; “I never said it was so bad as
that. But, you see, we policemen like to know about all the people
that were near a crime. That’s why I’m asking you to help me. The
smallest evidence may be valuable, and this young man may have noticed
something yesterday. You see, he left before the murder was
discovered, so he couldn’t know we wanted him, could he?”

Mrs. Yates, all suspicions removed by Colson’s bland manner, gave him,
so far as she could remember, a description of her lodger, which the
detective carefully took down. When she had finished, he said:

“Thank you, Mrs. Yates; excellent! You really ought to belong to the
force, you remember everything so well. Observation is a very great
gift, and you’ve got it. Splendid!”

Mrs. Yates smiled a smile of satisfaction. She was not proof against
flattery. The detective saw he had scored a point.

“Now I’m going to take you into my confidence,” he went on blandly.
“I’ll let you into a little secret. We detectives aren’t half as
clever as people think we are, and I don’t mind telling you—quite
between ourselves, you know—that this is going to be a difficult case.
You wouldn’t think it, perhaps, but, up to the present moment, I
haven’t the slightest idea as to who committed the murder.”

Mrs. Yates had sat down in a chair and was regarding him fixedly,
taking it all in.

“Lor’ sir,” she exclaimed, “you don’t say so?”

He nodded gravely.

“It’s quite true,” he said, “and I want you to help me.”

“Me, sir? What can I do?”

“You’re a discreet woman, Mrs. Yates—a very sensible woman. And I’m
sure you can hold your tongue if you like.”

“I never was one to gossip.”

“I knew it! Well, now, when I come back this evening I don’t want
anyone to know I’m here. You put some supper up in my room—show me now
how I can get up to it without being seen—and if anyone asks where I
am, you can tell them the truth, that I’m gone into Frattenbury, see?”

Mrs. Yates, who was almost trembling with excitement, showed him how
he could get in by a back door she would leave unlatched. She also
showed him a shed where he could put his bicycle.

“And one other thing, Mrs. Yates,” he said; “you’re going to keep your
mouth shut, but you must keep your ears open. You’re sure to have men
in to-night discussing the murder. If you hear them say anything about
having seen Mr. Templeton—or any strangers about—you make a note of it
and let me know.”

“I will, sir. I’ll do what I can.”

Colson took his hat and stick and a dispatch-case which he had brought
over in the morning.

When he got outside the inn he walked over to Constable Gadsden, who
was still on the spot. Quite a number of people were about, for the
news had spread rapidly, and anything so gruesome as the central scene
of a murder is attractive.

“Well, Gadsden,” said he, drawing him to one side, “you haven’t let
anyone go on board the yacht—no newspaper men, or anyone?”

The burly policeman grinned.

“Trust me for that, sergeant.”

“Mind you don’t. I’m going into Frattenbury now. I’ll send a man out
to relieve you.”

“Thank you, sergeant. I’ve found out something since I saw you.”

“What?”

The policeman opened his pocket-book. No self-respecting constable
ever reports to a superior officer without a reference to this
mysterious compendium.

“Man o’ the name o’ Simmonds—George Simmonds—lives in the cottage
yonder—states that he was walking along the field path yesterday and
met a man of the description o’ Mr. Templeton going into
Frattenbury—between half-past five and six.”

“May be useful,” replied the detective. “More useful still, though, if
he’d seen him coming back. If there’s anything else to report you can
do so to the superintendent when you get back to Frattenbury.”

He himself took the field path to Frattenbury, and not the road. For
half a mile or so the path ran by the side of the estuary, separated
from the shore by a low hedge. Then, just as one got over a stile, it
turned abruptly and led through a series of marshy meadows. There had
been rain a few days before, and in places the path was damp, showing
a number of footprints.

Just by one of the stiles was a particularly impressionable bit of
ground. The stile had a high step, from which one naturally jumped and
left well-defined footprints. Colson seated himself on the stile,
opened his dispatch-case, and drew out a shoe. Then he got down into
the path and investigated all the footprints narrowly, testing them by
measuring them and comparing the results with the shoe.

Presently he gave a little grunt of satisfaction. The shoe exactly
fitted one of the footprints. Walking slowly on, he was easily able to
trace these particular footprints going towards Frattenbury.

“Doesn’t help much,” he said to himself, “but—ah, here’s what I want.”

For he caught sight of a similar footprint—and then another—pointing
in the reverse direction. Several more were apparent as he walked on.

“That settles it,” he exclaimed; “Templeton walked back to Marsh Quay
by the same route. I’m glad I thought to bring one of the shoes he was
wearing with me. Now for the other test.”

The other test was still more simple. Every now and then, plainly
defined, was a small square hole showing in the soft soil, about
three-eighths of an inch in diameter. The detective stuck the
walking-stick he was carrying into the ground beside one of these
holes. It bore one of those tapering, square ferrules which are common
in Alpine walking-sticks. When he removed it from the soil, the
impression was exactly the same as the other.

A less shrewd man than Colson would have been perfectly satisfied with
the result, and would have made the very natural deduction that
Templeton had carried the walking-stick. Indeed, there was every
reason to deduce this. But Colson was not only a quick-witted man—he
was also a slow and careful thinker. It was his method, when he had
discovered any clue, to work out every possible explanation from it
mentally raising objections to each deduction. More than once this
habit of his had prevented him acting on hasty and erroneous
conclusions, and he knew the value of it well.

Besides, this was the biggest case in which he had been engaged. Never
yet had he been called upon to investigate so serious a crime as
murder, except in one instance, where everything had been fairly
obvious from the first. So, for his own credit and chances of
promotion, he was anxious to make no mistake.

Therefore, having turned the matter over in his mind, when he reached
Frattenbury, instead of going straight to the police station to make
his report, he called on Canon Fittleworth. This was in the afternoon,
and, it will be remembered, before the Canon had compared the cigar
band with those in his box.

“I’m sorry to disturb you,” he said, “but you may be able to tell me
something. When Mr. Templeton left your house last night, who showed
him out?”

“I did,” replied the Canon.

“Good. Now can you remember if he was carrying a walking-stick when he
left?”

They were standing in the hall as they were talking.

“I can tell you exactly,” said the Canon. “He had a stick when he came
here—this is it,” and he drew one from the rack, “but when we opened
the door last night it was clouding up and looked like rain, and the
glass was falling. Templeton said he didn’t want to risk getting wet,
as he suffered from rheumatism. I lent him an umbrella. By the way, I
saw it in the cabin of the yacht, now I come to think of it.”

Colson had taken the stick into his hand and was examining the point
of it. He lifted his eyebrows and gave a low whistle. The ferrule was
of the Alpine pattern. He carefully compared it with the one he had
brought from Marsh Quay. The sizes were exactly the same.

“What is it?” asked Canon Fittleworth.

“Only a curious coincidence, that throws me entirely out of my
reckoning. I’ll take this stick, please. Oh, by the way, I went
through all the papers I could find on the _Firefly_. There was
nothing particular. Only, perhaps you can throw some light on this
one.”

He took a letter from his pocket and handed it to the Canon. It bore
an address in North-West London, and the writer merely said he was
glad to hear that Templeton had arrived in England, and hoped that,
when he was tired of yachting, he would run up to see him, as there
were two or three matters of business to discuss. It was signed “A. F.
Crosby.”

“Do you know who it is?”

“Why, yes,” said the Canon. “I ought to have thought of it before, but
this terrible event has put things out of my mind. Templeton mentioned
his name last night. He said he was going up to town shortly to see
his lawyer, Anthony Crosby. I know him slightly myself. I ought to
have written to him. I’ll do so at once.”

“Oh, that’s capital,” said Colson. “Don’t you trouble to write. We’ll
’phone up to the London police, and ask them to see him at once. We
must have him down to the inquest to-morrow, if possible. He may be a
great help. Thank you very much. I must be off.”

When he arrived at the police station he found the superintendent in
consultation with the Chief Constable, Major Renshaw, a typical
military man with close-cropped moustache.

The two men welcomed the detective-sergeant eagerly.

“Well,” said the superintendent, “we’re very anxious to know
developments. Have you had any luck?”

“Yes, sir—several things have come to light, and there may be
something to go upon, though I’m still very much in the dark. First of
all, though, I’ll get you to have this description ’phoned to the
police throughout the county—a young man, a cyclist, staying at the
‘Mariner’s Arms,’ who left suddenly early this morning. The landlady
says he was apparently riding into Frattenbury. We ought to get hold
of him in any case.”

“Most decidedly,” said the Chief Constable. “It’s important.”

After this was done, and the matter of Mr. Crosby taken in hand, the
superintendent told Colson that he had telephoned to London about
Moss, but, as yet, there were no developments. Then the detective
opened his dispatch-case and spread an assortment of articles on the
table.

“I made a pretty searching examination,” he said, “but I’m afraid
there are not many results so far. The lockers and portmanteau mostly
contained clothes—and some money. There’s only one letter—and there
weren’t many—that seemed to bear on the case, and it isn’t signed.
Here it is, in an envelope with the Frattenbury postmark, posted to
the G.P.O., Ryde. And it’s typewritten.”

The letter proved to be a half-sheet of nondescript notepaper, with
the words:

  “I shall be at home to discuss matters if you will call next
  Saturday evening after 8.30—not later than 9.”

That was all. A grim smile lit up the face of the Chief Constable as
he read it, shaking his head.

“That’s not much help,” he said. “Of course it’s the appointment Canon
Fittleworth spoke of. What next?”

The detective produced a blotting-pad.

“There’s not much here,” he said, “but if you hold it before a
looking-glass you can make out what I think to be bits of two
letters.”

Across the top of the blotter, by holding it in front of the glass
portions of words appeared as follows:

   e  y u on   turd    ft    on,

and then the signature, freshly blotted and quite plain:

        Y  rs f ithfully,
          R. Templeton.

“‘See you on Saturday afternoon,’” said the superintendent. “That
ought to be plain enough. It looks like his appointment with Moss. We
know he went there.”

“That’s it,” said the detective. “Now try the other. That’s a
puzzler.”

For some time the two men scrutinised the blotting-paper. The ink
marks were faint and broken, and in most cases only isolated letters,
or bits of words. Finally, they agreed with Colson that the result was
this:

   a d  ver  zr    ice s  o     ion &  roo
     s is   nal

“Well,” said the Chief Constable, “you’ll be a smart fellow if you
make anything out of _that_—even if it’s worth anything. What next?”

“I went through his pockets. There were no papers of any kind in them.
That looks suspicious. A gentleman in his position would hardly go
about without a pocket-book or something. There was loose cash in the
trousers pockets—and in the waistcoat pocket I found this.”

He produced a very small bag of chamois leather, with a loose string
tied to it to fasten it.

“Look!” he said, as he shook something out on the table.

The two men started. A brilliant coruscation of light flashed before
them. It was a diamond the size of a pea.

“Uncut,” said the Major, as he took it up to examine it; “in the rough
at present, but still brilliant. It’s worth a heap of money. And he
came from South Africa? Where are the rest?”

“Ah,” said the superintendent, “and where does Moss come in?”

“There’s something else,” said Colson, “and I’m not sure whether it
may not be the best clue of all—if we can find the owner of it.”

And he laid the two walking-sticks on the table.

“This one,” he went on, taking up the one the Canon had given him,
“was carried by Templeton when he walked into Frattenbury yesterday
afternoon. I’ve traced the marks of it along the field path. But he
didn’t take it back with him—Canon Fittleworth lent him an umbrella.
And this one,” he added, taking up the other, “I found under the stern
seat of the dinghy. I’d almost made up my mind it had belonged to
Templeton, but inquiry from the Canon seems to show it didn’t. After
I’d found it I questioned Templeton’s man—Webb—though I took care not
to let him see it.”

“Why not?” asked the Chief Constable.

“Because, sir, I never like to give anything away if I can possibly
help it; and I thought, even then, that it might possibly have
belonged to someone else. What I wanted to find out from Webb was
whether there had been more than one walking-stick aboard the
_Firefly_. And there hadn’t. So now we know that this stick must have
been left by someone else who went out to the yacht.”

“Exactly,” said the superintendent. “And somebody else knows it, too.”

“Who?” asked Major Renshaw.

The superintendent and Colson exchanged meaning glances, and answered
simultaneously:

“The man who left it there.”

And Colson added:

“He made a bad mistake. And it’s mistakes that are the best clues.
That’s my experience.”

The Chief Constable and the superintendent examined the stick
carefully. It was a very ordinary plain ash walking-stick, with a
crook handle. The only noticeable thing about it was that a small
piece had been chipped off the handle. Otherwise there was nothing
remarkable about it.

Colson sat lost in thought. Presently his face cleared a little.

“I’ve got an idea,” he said; “it’s only a sort of forlorn hope. But I
may as well try it. By the way, I promised Gadsden he should be
relieved, sir,” he added to the superintendent. “He’s been at Marsh
Quay since early morning.”

The superintendent touched a bell, and a constable entered.

“Is Peters in?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Tell him to report for duty.”

“Very good, sir.”

Peters came in, and the superintendent gave him some brief
instructions. Then Colson spoke.

“I want you to do exactly what I say, Peters,” he said. “When you get
to Marsh Quay it will still be daylight. Ride your bicycle there and
leave it close to the shore. Then take one of the little canoes and
paddle out to the yacht—the _Firefly_. Don’t in any way touch the
dinghy that’s moored to her. Get on the yacht’s deck and stay there.
Do you understand?”

“Yes, sergeant.”

“As soon as it’s struck ten—or thereabouts—keep your eye fixed on the
upper window in the ‘Mariner’s Arms.’ There may be a light in the
room. Don’t take any notice of that. But directly you see the flash of
a red light in the window, get into the canoe and paddle ashore. Make
a bit of noise about it. Leave the canoe in the water—the tide will be
flowing—and make the painter fast to one of the posts you will
find—well up the little bank. Then light your bicycle lamp and ride
off—back to Frattenbury. I shan’t want you any more. If there’s
anybody about, sing out ‘Good night’ to them—let ’em see you’re going
off. You understand?”

“I’ll do it, sergeant.”

“That’s all, then. Good night, Major, if I don’t see you again. I’ll
drop in,” he added to the superintendent, “before I go back to Marsh
Quay. I’ve got a little job first. And I want this walking-stick.”

He went out, carrying the stick he had found in the dinghy.



CHAPTER VI

Colson is Baffled

Colson walked away from the police station till he came to a shop. It
was Sunday and, of course, the shutters were up, but he rang the bell
at the side door. It was opened by the proprietor, a thin,
sandy-haired man, who shook hands with the detective.

“Good afternoon, Mr. Colson,” he said, “come in, won’t you? We were
just sitting down to tea. The wife will be pleased, I’m sure, if
you’ll join us.”

“No, thank you, Mr. Blake. I’m sorry to disturb you. But I want you to
do something for me—if you will?”

Blake looked at him with interest.

“Anything about this murder at Marsh Quay?” he asked. “I heard you
were down there.”

“Now, look here, Mr. Blake, you and I know one another pretty well.
Don’t you ask me any questions about that, please. I believe you’re a
discreet man, or I shouldn’t have come to you. Will you hold your
tongue about it? About what I’m going to ask you?”

“Of course I will, Mr. Colson.”

“Very well. I want you to sell me a walking-stick—on a Sunday. Can we
go into your shop?”

“Certainly. Come along.”

He led the way into the shop, and turned on the electric light.
Whereat it was obvious that Mr. Blake dealt in tobacco, and those
other articles which generally characterise a tobacconist’s trade.

“What sort of a stick do you want?”

“One exactly like this—if you’ve got one.”

Blake took the stick in his hand and examined it carefully.

“You don’t know that stick, I suppose? You haven’t seen it before?”
asked Colson.

“Can’t say I have. It’s ordinary enough, eh? With a Swiss ferrule,
too. Might have been bought in Switzerland, and might not. We keep a
few of these ferrules now—some of our customers prefer them. Let’s
see—it ought to be easy to find one like it.”

A bundle of sticks was laid on the counter. Presently one was found
very closely resembling that brought by Colson.

“All right,” he said, “this will do—if you can put another ferrule on
it.”

“That’s easily done. Let’s be sure it’s the exact length—ah—we must
take half an inch off it. If you’re going to palm it off on anyone as
the original, it’s a hint to remember that nothing would give it away
so much as a difference, however small, in length. Half a minute. My
tools are at the back of the shop.”

When he returned with the two sticks he said:

“You’ve noticed yours is chipped a bit in the handle?”

“I know. I’ll make the other all right.”

“Rub some dirt in when you’ve done, with a touch of oil. But, there, I
expect you know your own job, Mr. Colson. Won’t you stay and have
tea?”

“I’m busy, thanks.”

Colson’s next rendezvous was his own home, a pleasant little house a
few minutes’ walk outside the city walls. And the pleasant little
house contained a pleasant little wife, who bustled about to get tea.

“I was wondering if you’d be home to-day, Bob,” she said.

“I shall have to be away to-night, my dear. This is going to be a big
case, I think.”

“Any progress?”

He nodded.

“A little,” he said; “tell you all about it when I’ve finished tea.”

No one else knew it, but Colson always took his wife into his
confidence. He knew the value of a woman’s intuition. And many a time
she had helped him at his work with her quick wit.

So, seated by the fire, carefully cutting the stick he had just bought
with his knife, he told her all that had happened.

“Have you any idea who did it, Bob?”

“Not the slightest. But there are one or two strong suspicions, eh?”

She nodded.

“You think robbery was the motive?”

“Looks like it—if that little bag had more diamonds in it.”

“But why should the thief not take the bag itself—and why should he
put it back in Mr. Templeton’s waistcoat pocket?”

“Ask me another,” he replied.

“Well, here’s another, then, Bob. Suppose we grant that the murderer
carried this stick. Why was it in the dinghy. You yourself say he must
have taken another boat to get to the yacht, because the dinghy was
fast to her. How came that stick in the dinghy then?”

“I know,” he said slowly. “And it’s puzzled me, too.”

“Unless——”

“Unless what?”

“Unless Mr. Templeton took someone on board first, someone who laid
his walking-stick in the boat while Mr. Templeton rowed him out, and
left it there when he was brought back to shore.”

Colson brought his hand down on his knee with a smack.

“Good!” he ejaculated. “There may be something in that. It might not
belong to the murderer at all. But I’ll test it, all the same.”

“By the way,” went on his wife, “which side of the path were the
prints of the stick?”

The detective looked at her with admiration.

“You see that, do you? Well done! They were on the right-hand side as
I walked into Frattenbury. That’s what made me think—what I’ve proved
from Canon Fittleworth—that Templeton carried it. A man generally
carries his stick in his right hand.”

She smiled a little as she gazed into the fire, pleased with the
compliment.

He had finished cutting the stick now, and was comparing it with the
original. Then he rubbed in some dirt and oil. The two sticks looked
exactly alike.

“Let me see,” said his wife.

She handled them lightly.

“There’s a tiny knob just here,” and she showed him it on the new
stick.

“Bravo! One to you. I’ll have that off.”

With the most careful scrutiny they both compared the two sticks. The
work was completed. Colson rose to go.

“Now, dear,” he said, “put some things for the night into my bag and
strap it on my bike, please. I’ll be back presently. Also, strap on
this stick.”

“I’ll wrap it up in brown paper first,” she said. “You can’t be too
careful.”

He kissed her, and went to the police station. Nothing fresh had
transpired. He left the stick he had found on the dinghy at the
station, wrote out his report, talked over matters with the
superintendent, and finally went home to get his bicycle.

Colson was an exceedingly careful man, and instead of taking the Marsh
Quay road at once, he started out of the city in the opposite
direction and rode by a circuitous route till he reached the southern
road by a by-way. When he came to the turning that led to Marsh Quay,
he put out his lamp and rode carefully through the darkness,
congratulating himself when he reached the “Mariner’s Arms” that he
had not passed a single person.

Mrs. Yates had provided a tempting supper of cold meat, pickles,
cheese and beer, and while the detective was doing full justice to it,
came into his room.

“They’ve all gone now, sir,” she said; “there’s no one else in the
house.”

“That’s all right. Well, I suppose they talked about the murder, eh?”

“Nothing else, Mr. Colson. A lot o’ rubbish they talked, too. There’s
nothing I overheard ’em say that’s worth mentioning.”

“I see. Well, now, look here, Mrs. Yates. I want you to leave the
front door on the latch, and if you hear me go downstairs in the
night, don’t you take any notice, see?”

“Very good, sir. Anything more you want?”

“No, thank you, Mrs. Yates; you can clear away. Only, don’t take my
glass. I haven’t finished your excellent beer yet.”

When she had bid him good night, he lighted his pipe and leaned back
in his chair, thinking over the events of the day, sipping his beer
from time to time. Presently he looked at his watch. It was a little
after ten. Taking a small piece of red glass from his pocket, he
lifted the lamp from the table and approached the window with it. He
held the bit of glass in front of the lamp for a few minutes and then
put out the light.

He opened the window. It was a cloudy night and very dark. He could
hear Gadsden paddling himself ashore, and could just discern a dim
form as he landed. Gadsden was making plenty of noise. He lighted his
bicycle lamp, mounted his machine, and rode off, sounding his bell as
he did so. Colson heard him shout out “Good night” when he was a
little way down the road.

He sat by the window for some little time. Then, first putting on a
pair of rubber-soled tennis shoes, and taking with him the stick he
had brought from Frattenbury, first unwrapping it from its brown paper
covering, he slipped quietly downstairs and went out.

Very carefully picking his way, he went down to the shore. It was a
perfectly quiet night, the silence only broken by the ripple of the
tide flowing up the estuary. He looked around him. Only one light was
burning—in a window of Mr. Proctor’s house. The latter had evidently
not yet gone to bed.

Colson unhitched the painter from the post, slowly, without making a
sound, launched the canoe, and paddled out in silence. Arrived beside
the dinghy, he placed the walking-stick well under the seat, where he
had found the original, and returned just as quietly to the shore.

Before he went back to the inn he took careful stock of another canoe
that was close to the shore, and gave a nod of satisfaction. Then he
returned to his room and waited and watched.

As he had said, it was a forlorn hope and he hardly expected that
anything would come of it. It was more than probable that the murderer
was miles away by this time. And yet, if that stick _had_ belonged to
him, so far as Colson knew at present, it was the only clue to the
mystery. And whoever had left it in the dinghy must know that as well.
The point that Colson was building upon was the fact that the stick
had been stowed away under the seat of the dinghy and was not found on
board the yacht itself. If it belonged to the man who had committed
the crime, there was just the chance that he might calculate that
little notice had been taken of the dinghy. And it would be worth
something to him to get it back.

It was some time after midnight that Colson gave a start and stood
tense at the window. A slight sound had disturbed him. Straining his
eyes through the darkness, he could just discern a form apparently
bending over one of the canoes on the shore. Then he saw the form
straighten itself and walk a little distance away. He lost sight of
it, but in a few moments it returned. Again it bent down.

“He’s unfastening the painter,” murmured the detective. Then he could
see a man get into the canoe, and the next moment he could hear the
slight splash of a paddle. The unknown was making for the yacht.

Colson felt the little automatic pistol he carried in his pocket—he
was taking no risks. Quickly he made his way downstairs, opened the
door and went out, crouching low. It was his intention to get down to
the shore, lie hidden behind one of the boats, and catch the unknown
unawares as he landed. He looked across the water. The canoe was
alongside the dinghy now. He had to act quickly to get to his
hiding-place.

Then the unlucky thing happened. He caught his foot in a low post, and
went sprawling on the stones with a crash that rang out in the still
night. Colson swore roundly beneath his breath, picked himself up, and
rushed to the water’s edge. He knew he was discovered. Then, to his
dismay, he heard the splash of the paddle and could just see the canoe
shooting out beyond the yacht into the estuary.

He rushed for one of the other canoes, whipped out his knife, cut the
painter, and pushed her into the water. But as he stepped in he swore
again.

“Confound my luck,” he muttered; “there’s no paddle. _That’s_ what he
was up to.”

Looking out over the estuary, he saw the dim form of the canoe and its
occupant rapidly shooting up with the tide towards Frattenbury. By the
time he had found the paddle—thrown on the grass thirty yards away or
so—it was too late. The tide was running like a mill-stream.

Again cursing his bad luck, he paused for a minute to reflect. What
could he do? Nothing. The man might land on either bank, or at the
extremity of the estuary—anywhere. For a moment he thought of mounting
his bicycle, but the only road it was possible to ride was round by
Frattenbury. To attempt to follow up by running along the side of the
estuary in such a dark night would be equally fruitless for fast
going. The canoe would be running up that tide race with great speed,
and the occupant had every chance of escaping. Marsh Quay had neither
telephone nor telegraph; it was impossible to head him off by sending
a message to the Frattenbury police.

Colson shook his fist at the estuary, a disappointed man. To make
quite sure that the unknown had come for the walking-stick he paddled
out to the dinghy. It was a foregone conclusion. There was no stick
there.

He returned to the inn. There was nothing more to be done.

“There’s one thing, though,” he said as he undressed; “I’ve got the
original stick still, _and he doesn’t know it_. That’s a point to me,
and it may mean that I’ll have him yet.”

Colson was one of those fortunate individuals who can do with very
little sleep. He woke at an early hour, fresh and alert.

He glanced out of the window as he was dressing.

The tide was on the ebb. A canoe was out in mid-stream, a man in her
paddling down from the upper reach. As he drew nearer and began to
turn towards the shore, the detective recognised him. It was Mr.
Proctor.

Hastily Colson slipped on the rest of his clothes, and was on the
shore just as Mr. Proctor came in. The detective pursed up his lips as
he recognised the canoe. It was the one in which the unknown had made
his escape in the night.

Proctor was the first to speak as he stepped ashore. He smiled and
nodded affably.

“Good morning,” he said. “You’re an early bird, Mr. Colson.”

“So are you,” retorted the detective dryly. “Been out fishing?”

“No,” said the little man. “I’ve been rescuing my canoe. Some joker
seems to have played tricks with it in the night.”

“What do you mean?” asked the detective, looking at him intently.

But the little man returned his gaze quite calmly.

“Why,” he said, “my energetic young nephew went out eel-spearing at
some unearthly hour—to catch the falling tide—walks on the mud, you
know, with what we call cleat boards fixed to his boots. It’s a good
place for eels further up the estuary. About half a mile up he came on
my canoe, stranded on a ridge of stones. He couldn’t get her down to
the water by himself, so he ran home and woke me. Now, I should like
to know who took that canoe out last night.”

The detective thought he would like to know also.

“I suppose it wasn’t you—or any of your police people, eh?” went on
the little man. “I know in a case like this you’re up to all kinds of
funny little dodges.”

“No,” replied Colson, “it wasn’t any of us. Our man—Constable
Gadsden—came back to Frattenbury quite early last night. There was
nothing to keep him here.”

He looked hard again at Mr. Proctor as he spoke. He was getting a
little puzzled. But the other man was apparently quite calm.

“Well,” he said, “I’m going to get some breakfast. I suppose you had
yours before you came out from Frattenbury this morning?”

It was an innocent enough question, but Colson was on his guard.

“As a matter of fact, I didn’t,” he said. “I’m going to see if I can
get some at the ‘Mariner’s Arms.’”

Proctor nodded and turned to go.

“One moment,” said the detective. “I should like to see your nephew
about finding that canoe this morning.”

“What?” retorted Proctor, stopping and turning. “Do you think there’s
anything in it about the murder?”

“I never said that. But it’s best to take notice of anything, you
know.”

“Very well, then, come in after breakfast and see him.”

The detective ate his meal in silence. There were several matters
which gave him food for his mind as well as for his body. He was
getting profoundly dissatisfied with the course of events. When Mrs.
Yates came into the room to clear away he asked her, casually, how
long Mr. Proctor had been living at Marsh Quay.

“About two years, sir. The house was for sale then, and he came and
bought it. A nice gentleman he is, too.”

“Does he do anything?”

“Just a bit of boatin’ and fishin’, that’s all. He ain’t got cause to
work for his living. They say he’s retired from his business, whatever
it was I dunno.”

“Married?”

“No, sir. He’s a bachelor. Would you like a bit o’ fish for your
dinner, Mr. Colson? I can get some nice fresh whiting.”

“Excellent, Mrs. Yates. Keep your mouth shut about my sleeping here
last night. If anyone’s inquisitive, make ’em think I came out from
Frattenbury early this morning.”

“I will, sir.”

He strolled across to Mr. Proctor’s house. The latter saw him coming
through the window, and opened the door for him.

“Can I offer you a smoke?” he said. “A cigarette—or——”

“Thanks, I stick to my pipe. You don’t mind my lighting up?”

“Go on—have some of this,” and he set a tobacco jar on the table.
“Now, Phil,” he went on to the boy who was with him “you must tell the
detective-sergeant how you found my canoe this morning.”

Colson listened while the boy told his story, which was brief and
simple. And as he listened his gaze strayed once or twice to a
picture, a large framed photograph, hanging over the mantelpiece. He
asked Philip a few questions.

“Was she fastened in any way?”

“No—just lying on the stones.”

“Just as she might have been left if anyone had landed from her when
the tide was up, eh?”

“Yes.”

“I see. I expect you know all about the tide here, don’t you?”

“Rather,” said the boy.

“Then what time do you calculate the tide was up to the spot where you
found her?”

“That’s no use,” said Philip promptly. “You see, if the fellow landed
before high tide the flow would go on washing the canoe up and leave
her stranded when it turned. I found her at highwater mark, of
course.”

The detective, who had his eyes riveted on Proctor’s face while the
boy was replying, smiled approvingly.

“You’re a sharp lad,” he said. “I ought to have thought of that. But
it means that he landed either at or before high tide, eh?”

“That’s it,” said the boy.

Colson got up to go, lingering a little in the room. He strolled up to
the fire-place casually.

“That’s a fine view,” he said, nodding towards the picture. “Looks
like a bit of Switzerland.”

“It is,” replied Proctor. “It’s the Julier Pass, just before you get
into the Engadine.”

“Ah! I’ve always wanted to spend a holiday in Switzerland, but I’ve
never been able to run to it. You’ve been there, I suppose?” he asked
Proctor, turning to him as he spoke.

“Oh, yes—some years ago.”

“I see. Well, thank you very much, sir. I won’t hinder you any
longer.”

“I shall see you this afternoon,” said the little man, in the act of
showing him out. “I’m summoned on the jury.”

Philip had come to the door with them. The detective turned to him.

“Did you get good sport with the eels this morning?” he asked.

“Not so bad. It’s ripping sport. Have you tried it?”

“No,” laughed the detective. “What sort of a spear do you use?”

“Come along. I’ll show you. I left it in the garden here.”

Colson followed him, examined the spear, chatting as he did so.

“And you say about half a mile up yonder—near the spot where you found
the canoe—is the best place for eels?”

“Yes. I always go there.”

“I see. Well, if you get up so early you may make your uncle think
there’s a burglar in the house—if he hears you about in the dark, you
know, eh?”

“It wasn’t dark when I got up,” said the boy, a little surprised, “and
uncle knew I was going out this morning early. I told him so last
night.”

“Can’t quite make out that uncle of yours,” said Colson to himself as
he walked along. “I wonder if he is only a fool.”



CHAPTER VII

The Inquest

The coroner arrived a little early, and was standing on the shore with
the Chief Constable and the superintendent, the latter pointing out to
him the scene of the crime.

“Shocking, shocking!” he exclaimed in his dry, formal manner. “I have
your detailed report, Mr. Superintendent. I suppose there’s nothing
else I ought to know before we begin?”

“I don’t think so.”

“Well, I hope we shall catch the scoundrel,” remarked the Chief
Constable, giving a twist to his moustache, as they turned away
towards the inn. “He deserves hanging if ever a man did.”

“Precisely. He does, indeed,” replied the coroner. “That, of course,
is _your_ business. Mine is only to ascertain the circumstances and
the cause of death.” He took out his watch. “It’s about time we
began,” he went on.

When the jury filed into the bar parlour after viewing the body they
found none too much space. The room barely accommodated them, the
police, the witnesses, and representatives of the Press. Outside the
inn a little crowd of people had to be content with waiting patiently.

The coroner took his seat at the top of the table, near the
fire-place, which was in an angle of the room. Seated on his right,
facing across the table, and therefore at the other angle, was Mr.
Proctor, who had been elected by the jury as their foreman. Facing the
coroner sat the police and the doctor. On one side of the room was a
tall man with clean-shaven face and a professional manner. He was Mr.
Anthony Crosby, the lawyer from London.

The coroner opened the proceedings formally by explaining to the jury
their duties, concluding by saying:

“It will probably be necessary to adjourn this inquiry, and in that
case you will not be called upon to record your verdict this
afternoon. I think, from what I have said, you will quite understand
that the scope of this inquiry is limited to the actual cause of death
and circumstances which may throw light upon such cause. Of course, if
anything transpires which may assist the police in their
investigations, I shall exercise my prerogative in allowing it to be
brought forward. But the jury are not concerned with police
investigations other than those which threw light upon the actual
cause of death. I hope I make myself plain?”

And he turned an inquiring look upon Mr. Proctor.

The little man nodded his bald head.

“I think I can say on behalf of the jury, sir, that we all understand
perfectly.”

“Very well,” said the coroner. “Now we can proceed with the inquiry.”

Whereupon Anthony Crosby rose from his seat and said:

“I represent the late Mr. Templeton, sir—as his legal adviser.”

“Your name?” asked the coroner.

“Mr. Anthony Crosby, of Crosby and Paxton, 17b, Lincoln’s Inn Fields.”

The coroner bowed and made a note of it.

The first witness called was Jim Webb, who gave evidence of the
discovery of the body early on the previous morning. The coroner asked
him a few questions.

“You say that the deceased had arranged to go into Frattenbury on the
Saturday afternoon?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And that you were given the night off?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Tell me, did you know whom he was going to see?”

“The Reverend Fittleworth, sir. I guessed it afterwards.”

The coroner elevated his eyebrows.

“_Guessed_ it? What do you mean? How did you guess it?”

The man explained that he had read Canon Fittleworth’s name and
address on the letter he had posted for his master.

“Were you in the habit of prying into Mr. Templeton’s correspondence?”
asked the coroner sarcastically.

Jim Webb reddened.

“No, sir, I wasn’t,” he replied emphatically.

“Oh! How many more names and addresses did you read?”

“Not any, sir. As a matter of fact that was the only letter he ever
gave me to post.”

“You’re sure? Remember you are on oath.”

“Quite sure, sir.”

“Very well.”

Anthony Crosby interposed just as Webb was about to stand down.

“May I put a question to the witness?”

“Yes—if you wish. It should be done through me.”

“Thank you, sir. Will you ask him if he can give an account of his
actions from Saturday evening till Sunday morning?”

“You hear the question,” said the coroner to Webb; “what have you to
say?”

“Of course I can,” said the man, a little indignantly. “I was in my
uncle’s house at Frattenbury. I can bring three witnesses to prove
that.”

“Are you satisfied?” the coroner asked Crosby.

“Perfectly, thank you.”

“You ought to be grateful for that question,” said the coroner to
Webb, who was muttering something; “it clears you in the eyes of the
jury of any connection with the crime. Next witness, please.”

The next witness was the doctor, who gave his evidence tersely and
technically. Several times the coroner had to ask him to explain
surgical terms to the jury.

“How long do you consider he had been dead?” asked the coroner.

“Some hours—I would not undertake to say precisely how many.”

“Well—before or after midnight?”

“Probably before. Possibly after.”

“You will not commit yourself?”

“No.”

“You think he was stabbed with a knife?”

“I do not. I consider that the weapon was more in the form of a
dagger. The wound was distinctly triangular.”

“And that death was instantaneous?”

“Death was instantaneous.”

“There were no signs of a struggle?”

“None. I am of opinion that the deceased was probably seated on the
bunk, leaning towards the table, that he fell forward, struck his head
against the table, and then pitched onto the floor of the cabin. There
was a slight abrasion on the left temple which makes this probable.”

After one or two further questions the doctor resumed his seat. He was
followed by Tom Gale, who gave evidence as to the arrival of the yacht
and the crossing of the estuary by the murdered man. When he had
finished, the coroner addressed the superintendent.

“You have this matter in hand?” he asked.

“We have, sir. I should like to suggest that it is strictly a question
for the police at this moment.”

“Certainly,” replied the coroner. “The jury will please note it. It
may have a bearing on the case at a further stage of the inquiry. I
think that is what you mean?”

“Quite so, sir,” replied the superintendent. “Thank you.”

The superintendent himself was next called upon. Briefly and clearly
he described his visit to the yacht the previous morning,
corroborating the non-technical portion of the doctor’s evidence. The
coroner leaned back in his chair, the tips of his fingers together,
and thought for a moment. Then he said:

“A thorough investigation of the cabin was made, I presume?”

“Yes, sir. I placed it in the hands of Detective-Sergeant Colson.”

“Is there any matter in connection with that investigation which you
consider the jury ought to know?”

“At present, sir, I would rather not advance any information—except to
say that there is nothing which would assist the jury in arriving at
their verdict. And I ask for an adjournment of the inquiry when all
the witnesses called to-day have been heard.”

The coroner nodded.

“That is quite reasonable,” he said, “quite reasonable.”

Mr. Crosby rose.

“In my position,” he said, “I should naturally wish further questions
to be put to the witness, but I shall be perfectly satisfied if I have
an assurance from the police that they will give me any information
which may be of use to me.”

“You will do this?” asked the coroner.

“Most certainly,” replied the superintendent. “Our wish is only that
certain details may not become public.”

The next witness was Canon Fittleworth. He had known the coroner for
years, fairly intimately, and he smiled a little as that functionary
asked his name, address and occupation as though he were an entire
stranger. He told the jury the facts he had already put before the
superintendent. Rather a lengthy examination followed, in the course
of which the coroner asked him:

“You say the deceased informed you he had business with someone in
Frattenbury on Saturday night?”

“He did.”

“You do not know with whom?”

“No.”

“He did not tell you?”

“He did not.”

“He did not drop any hint?”

“No.”

“You knew Mr. Templeton fairly intimately—didn’t he mention anyone he
knew in Frattenbury? It is an important point.”

“I did not know him very intimately. I hadn’t seen him for some years.
So far as I am aware, he knew no one in Frattenbury except myself and
family.”

“You have no idea what this business was that he mentioned?”

“Not exactly.”

“What do you mean by ‘not exactly’?”

The coroner was looking at the Canon keenly. The jury were interested.

“Only that, in the course of conversation, he mentioned that he was
glad to be getting rid of something valuable he had been carrying
about for a long time.”

“What was it?”

“He didn’t say.”

“You are sure?”

“Yes.”

“Thank you, Canon Fittleworth. That will do. You will allow me—and I
am sure the jury will join me in this—you will allow us to express our
very deep sympathy towards you and our family in this terrible
tragedy.”

The Canon bowed.

“Thank you,” he said. “There is—er—a statement I wish to
make—something in the way of evidence.”

“What is it?” asked the coroner.

“When I went on board the yacht yesterday morning there was something
I found in the cabin—something I ought, perhaps, to have given to the
police—but my mind was so much agitated at the time.”

The superintendent and Colson looked up quickly. The coroner asked
sharply:

“What was it?”

“A band off a cigar—lying on the floor of the cabin—here it is,” and
he laid it on the table.

The jury leaned forward—it was a moment of intense interest—the
coroner motioned for the cigar band to be passed to him, took and
examined it. Then he sat still thinking, leaning back in his chair,
his head bent down. Then he said:

“You think this important?”

“I do.”

“Why?”

“Because my cousin did not smoke. He told me so on Saturday evening.”

The coroner sat bolt upright in his chair, a frown on his face, his
eyes literally glaring at the Canon.

“The jury must see this. Pass it round,” he exclaimed.

Then he went on with great severity:

“You must forgive my saying, Canon Fittleworth, that I consider you
have behaved in an exceedingly careless manner. I have no doubt that
you did not think—as you say—but a man of your intelligence ought to
have thought. This should have been handed to the police immediately.
It is just such want of thought that often leads to grave hindrances
of justice. I am sorry to have to say this, but, in my position here,
it is only my duty.”

He had leaned forward as he spoke, his elbows on the table. As he
resumed his former upright position, his right elbow swept one or two
papers off the table. They fell fluttering into the fire-place. He
leaned over to the right to pick them up, but before he could do so
the foreman of the jury went down on one knee to assist him.

The coroner picked up one bit of paper, Proctor the rest.

“Thanks,” said the coroner as the foreman handed them to him.

Meanwhile, the cigar band was being passed from man to man of the
jury. Each of them examined it solemnly and portentously, one or two
shaking their heads with an air of profound wisdom. So it went round
till it reached the foreman, and his examination was the longest of
all. He pursed up his little round mouth, adjusted a pair of
spectacles on his nose, and looked carefully at the little red and
gold object. Finally, as though loath to part with it, he handed it to
two of the jurymen across the table who had not yet seen it, and they
passed it on to the coroner.

Meanwhile, the Canon was standing with burning face. It was a new and
humiliating experience for a cathedral dignitary to be soundly rated
in public, and though, in his heart of hearts, he admitted the justice
of it, he was exceedingly irritated.

“I much regret,” he said stiffly, and a little pompously—“I much
regret what you are pleased to call my indiscretion, but I am not
accustomed to experiences of this nature. I can say no more.”

“Have you anything to add?” asked the coroner, relenting a little, but
still stern.

If the worthy Canon had been feeling normal he might have said more.
But he was so acutely concerned with what he considered an undignified
situation that he merely remarked:

“Nothing. Except that the brand is that of a particular cigar which I
smoke myself.”

It was here that the foreman of the jury interposed:

“May I ask a question?”

But the coroner, after a moment’s thought, said:

“You may ask me to put a question if you please, but in the interests
of the case I imagine the police would rather you did not.”

And the Chief Constable, who had been in whispered consultation with
the superintendent and Colson, immediately exclaimed:

“Thank you. We much prefer that no questions should be asked. We
consider this matter as strictly belonging to the police—at this stage
of the inquiry.”

“I think it does,” replied the coroner. “I shall hand over this cigar
band to you, of course.”

And he laid it on the table. There was one man who never took his eyes
off it for a moment, and that was the detective, who put it in his
pocket-case a minute or two later when the inquiry was formally
adjourned.

“You may stand down, Canon Fittleworth,” said the coroner stiffly.
“Are there any more witnesses?”

There were none.

“You ask for an adjournment,” said the coroner to the superintendent,
“for how long?”

“This day fortnight, sir.”

The coroner consulted his diary. “Will Saturday week do?” he asked. “I
have a case in court on the Monday.”

“That will do very well, sir,” replied the superintendent.

The majority pressed out of the tap-room, Colson and Anthony Crosby
being among the few who remained. The doctor, who had motored Canon
Fittleworth over to Marsh Quay, was in a hurry to get back. As the
latter got into the car, the superintendent came up and said, more in
sorrow than in anger:

“You ought to have given us that cigar band at once, really you ought,
sir.”

“I know I ought,” said the Canon, whose injured pride was beginning to
thaw. “I’m sorry.”

“I’ll call later on, if I may—or Colson will—we shall want to see your
particular brand of cigars.”

“Do!”

But when Colson and the superintendent made a closer examination of
that cigar band, they agreed that it might not be worth while
troubling the worthy Canon.

“These parsons aren’t much help,” said Colson sarcastically; “they’d
best stick to preaching and not mix themselves up in our business.
Bother the blighter! I say.”

“I say—how did you manage to miss that cigar band, on the yacht?”
asked the superintendent.

“I can tell you exactly, sir. I made my examination while the body was
on the floor. When they came to lay it out on the table I went on
deck—I was still there when you and the Canon came aboard, you
remember? I made a further examination afterwards, but that band must
have been under Templeton’s body in the first place. That would
account for the Canon finding it.”



CHAPTER VIII

Winnie Cotterill Pays a Visit to Frattenbury

“Hurry up, Winnie, breakfast is all ready.”

“All right,” came a voice from somewhere, “I’ll be with you in a
minute. You begin—don’t wait for me.”

Maude Wingrave seated herself at the breakfast table and poured out a
cup of tea. It was a tiny room, high up in a block of flats, looking
over Battersea Park. The girl who sat at the table was short and
dark-haired, with a merry expression on her somewhat plain face.

“You are the limit, Winnie,” she exclaimed as a newcomer entered the
room, a girl of about five and twenty, with a fresh, clear-cut face
and grey eyes. “You’re a downright lazy pig.”

“I can’t help it. I simply _hate_ getting up. What’s for breakfast?
I’m hungry.”

“Go on—help yourself. Do something towards running this establishment,
if it’s only _that_. I’ve not too much time. Can’t look after you.”

And she glanced at her wrist-watch.

“You ought to be thankful, Winnie Cotterill, that you don’t have to
keep office hours.”

“I am,” replied Winnie. “Providence never intended me to be punctual,
so Providence has provided me with work that doesn’t need a 9 a.m.
beginning each day. Pass the toast.”

“What are you doing to-day?”

“Finishing the cover of the Christmas number of _Peter’s Magazine_, my
dear, and I’m thankful to get it off my hands. Then I’m going
seriously to tackle that short story the editor of _The Holborn_ sent
me to illustrate. A ‘horrible murder,’ Maude. With a detective in it.
I’m going to make him a little ugly, snubbed-nose creature, wearing
big police boots. True to life, my dear—none of your impossible
Sherlock Holmes.”

The other girl laughed.

“I’ve got an interview with our new ‘serial’ this morning,” she
said—“a great big man of fifty, with a solemn beard and spectacles.
He’s selling us the most romantic piffle you ever read. There’ll be a
boom in our issue when the servant girls get hold of it. Hand over the
paper if you’re not using it. I want to glance at the news before I
go.”

Winnie Cotterill passed the newspaper to her friend. Maude Wingrave
opened it.

“Hallo!” she exclaimed, “talk about your story with a ‘horrible
murder’ in it—here’s a real one!”

“What is it?”

Maude read out the head-lines:

“_Mysterious Crime._”

“_Yachtsman Murdered on Board His Yacht._”

“_Inquest To-day._”

“Who is it?” asked Winnie, as she reached over for the teapot.

Maude began to read:

  “Early yesterday morning a shocking discovery was made on board a
  small yacht, anchored in the little harbour of Marsh Quay, on an
  estuary of the Channel, about two miles from the cathedral city of
  Frattenbury. Mr. Reginald Templeton, a Fellow of the Royal
  Geographical Society, only lately returned from South Africa——”

Winnie Cotterill dropped her knife and fork on her plate.

“Who?” she exclaimed.

“Mr. Reginald Templeton. Why?”

“Oh, my dear!”

“What is it?”

“Pass me the paper. It must be—yes—it _is_—murdered! Oh, Maude!”

“Do you know him?”

“Why, of course I do! Ever since I can remember. He was a great friend
of my mother, and always so kind to me. I always called him Uncle.
Why, I only had a letter from him last week. He was coming to London,
soon, he said.”

“Oh, you poor dear! Are you _sure_ it’s the same man, Winnie?”

“It must be,” said the girl, looking at the paper again. “Yes—when he
wrote he said he was yachting on the South Coast. Oh, Maude, what am I
to do?”

Maude had risen from the seat and was looking over her friend’s
shoulder.

“Look,” she said, pointing with her finger, “he’d been dining the
night before with his cousin, Canon Fittleworth. Do you know him?”

“I’ve heard Uncle speak of him. No, I’ve never met him.”

“Why not write to him—or telegraph?”

Winnie shook her head.

“I don’t know,” she replied. “Of course, you see, Mr. Templeton isn’t
any relation of mine. But I was awfully fond of him. Poor old Uncle! I
know what I _will_ do, dear,” she went on impulsively.

“What?”

“I _must_ finish that cover this morning. But I’ll go down to
Frattenbury this afternoon and see Canon Fittleworth—yes, I will.”

Maude had glanced at her watch again, and was putting on her gloves.

“Will it be any good?” she asked.

“Oh, Maude, I _must_! He’s been so awfully good to me. Why, my dear,
when my mother died, and there wasn’t a penny, it was Mr. Templeton
who paid for my art training. I owe my living to him—really. Don’t you
see?”

Maude nodded her head sympathetically.

“I know, dear. I should do just the same. I’m _so_ sorry. Yes—go down
to Frattenbury. I wish I could go with you, but I simply _have_ to get
to the office.”

“Don’t worry about me, dear. I shall take a handbag in case I stay the
night—I can get a room at an hotel. I’ll wire and let you know if I’m
not coming back this evening.”

“Thanks. I’d like to know. Good-bye!”

And she nodded brightly as she left the room to go to her work. She
was sub-editress of one of the many popular weeklies issued by a
well-known firm of publishers and newspaper proprietors. The two
“bachelor” girl friends had been sharing the same flat for nearly a
year.

Winnie Cotterill slowly finished her breakfast, reading the details of
the tragedy as she did so—a couple of columns in the usual blaring
journalistic style, followed by a short article on local police
methods, detrimental, of course, to the said local police. She was
getting into a calmer frame of mind now, though still much upset by
the shock of hearing such unexpected news.

Breakfast over, she went into the little adjacent room she dignified
by the name of “studio” and got to work on the magazine cover. When it
was finished, she took a bus to Fleet Street and deposited it with her
editor, in whose office she consulted a Bradshaw.

She had already packed a small handbag and, after a light lunch at a
restaurant, she caught the afternoon train to Frattenbury, arriving
about six, and at once made her way to the Close.

Canon Fittleworth was closeted in his study with Anthony Crosby, who
had returned from Marsh Quay and was staying the night at an hotel. A
maid announced the fact that a young lady wished to see the Canon, and
handed him a visiting card on a salver.

The Canon adjusted his pince-nez and read the name out loud.

“Miss Winifred Cotterill.”

“Eh?” interjaculated the lawyer, looking up from some papers he was
studying.

“Miss Winifred Cotterill,” repeated the Canon. “I don’t know her.”

“But I do,” said Anthony Crosby, “at least, I know of her. She is, in
a way, connected with this case, and I was going to communicate with
her as soon as I got back to London.”

“Oh, well, in that case, we’ll see her together. Show Miss Cotterill
in, Jane.”

The Canon looked her over quickly as she entered. He was, for the
moment, half afraid that there might have been some unpleasant
incident in his cousin’s life, with some undesirable female connected
with it. His suspicions were quickly removed. He saw a neatly-dressed
girl with a refined and pleasant face, and took a step towards her.

“Miss Cotterill?”

“I’m afraid I must apologise. I came down to Frattenbury
because—because I read about Mr. Templeton’s murder in the paper this
morning, and you are his cousin, and——”

“Now do sit down, Miss Cotterill,” interrupted the Canon, “and before
I ask you anything else—have you had any tea?”

“I’ve only just arrived,” replied the girl.

“I thought so. Now, I’m going to ring for tea. I’m sure you want some,
and then you can tell us all about it. Mr. Crosby,” and he waved his
hand in introduction towards the lawyer, “heard your name when it was
announced, and says he knows of you.”

Winnie Cotterill looked surprised.

“You know me?” she asked.

“I’ve heard about you, Miss Cotterill,” said the lawyer. “You see, I
had the privilege of being a friend of Mr. Templeton, as well as his
legal adviser, and he mentioned you several times. I quite understand
what a shock this terrible affair must be to you.”

“He was most awfully kind to me,” said the girl, her voice quavering a
little, “and I felt I must come down and find out more about it.”

Anthony Crosby nodded sympathetically. The maid brought in tea. Winnie
Cotterill explained how Mr. Templeton had been a friend of her mother,
and what he had done for her. Then she listened while the Canon told
her about the murder.

“But why, _why_ was he murdered?” she asked. “I can’t understand.”

“Ah, my dear young lady,” said the Canon, “that is what we all want to
know. We suspect that robbery was the cause of it and, of course, the
police have it in hand. Now tell me,” and he looked at his watch, “I
naturally take an interest in any friend of my poor cousin. Were you
thinking of going back to London to-night? I ask because the funeral
will take place to-morrow afternoon—the coroner has given an order for
burial—and I thought you might like to be present.”

“I should, very much,” replied the girl, “and I’ll get a bed at an
hotel for to-night. Perhaps you can tell me of one?”

She had risen to go.

“Sit down and have another cup of tea,” said the Canon with a smile.
“I’ll be back in a minute or two.”

He came back with his wife. Mrs. Fittleworth greeted the girl warmly.

“You poor thing!” she said; “my husband has just told me about you.
I’m so sorry. But you mustn’t think of going to an hotel. Do let us
put you up for the night.”

“It’s very kind of you.”

“Nonsense. Of course you will stay with us. Come along, you must be
very tired.”

She took the girl out of the room, and the two men were left together.
The Canon looked inquiringly at Anthony Crosby. The latter took a
cigarette from his case, tapped it deliberately, lighted it, and
began.

“I was going to tell you about Miss Cotterill, anyhow,” he said. “From
all I have gathered, you know very little of your late cousin?”

“Very little indeed. I so rarely saw him. And he was a reticent man. I
really know nothing at all about his affairs.”

The lawyer nodded.

“Yes,” he agreed, “he was distinctly reticent, I know. I suppose _I_
know as much as anyone, and that isn’t a great deal. Now, about this
girl—I speak in confidence, of course?”

“Of course.”

“Well, Templeton—like most men—had a romance in his life.”

“He never married.”

“No,” said the lawyer deliberately, “the other man did that—it was
years ago now.”

“Who was the woman?” asked the Canon, his curiosity aroused.

“This girl’s mother,” replied Crosby. “That is as much as he told me.
She was left a widow when Winifred was about five years old—as far as
I understand.”

“Why didn’t he marry her then?”

The lawyer smiled grimly.

“I always consider that parsons, doctors and we lawyers have more
chances of knowing about human nature than the rest of the world. And
you ought to know that very often when a man doesn’t get his first
chance of marrying the woman he loves, he won’t take a second chance
when it comes. That’s the only answer I can give you.”

“Yes—it’s often true,” said the Canon thoughtfully. “I’ve seen it more
than once.”

“Exactly. Well, the fact remains that Templeton didn’t marry Mrs.
Cotterill. But he stood by her and her child. The girl has told you he
paid for her training as an art student.”

The Canon nodded.

“Just so. Well, before he went abroad to South Africa he came to me
and asked me to draw up his will. I have it at my office. If there
isn’t a later one, of course, it stands good for probate.”

“I see.”

Crosby flicked the ash off his cigarette and smiled at the Canon.

“I’m afraid you won’t benefit by it,” he said.

Canon Fittleworth laughed.

“It’s no disappointment,” he replied; “I never expected anything.”

“Then I hope that, as his nearest relative, as I suppose you are, you
won’t be envious when I tell you he has left everything he possesses
to this girl—Winifred Cotterill.”

“Indeed?” said Canon Fittleworth. “No, I’m not a bit envious. The girl
is an orphan, and I’m only too glad. Besides, after what you tell me,
it’s perfectly natural. Romance has a strange sway over human
affairs.”

“But,” said the other slowly and deliberately, “unless Templeton made
anything out of his last venture—which I doubt—it won’t be very
much—not two thousand pounds.”

“I see—I knew nothing of his affairs. But I always imagined him to be
comfortably off.”

“He should have been—but for my profession,” said the lawyer. “No,
don’t blame me. I did the best I could for him, but he would not
listen to reason. He got involved, some years ago, in an unfortunate
and expensive lawsuit—a question of adjacent properties. I advised
him, at the time, to compromise, but he was adamant. The case went
against him, and he insisted upon carrying it to the Court of Appeal.
The appeal was quashed—as I knew it would be. The costs were
enormous—he insisted on having the best counsel—and he had to sell the
whole of his property to pay them. The other man bought the property,
and Templeton never forgave him.”

“I remember hearing something about it at the time,” said the Canon.
“So that was why he sold the little place in Buckinghamshire! What a
pity! I suppose he was in the wrong, though?”

“I didn’t say that,” replied the other dryly. “It was a case of law.
And I admit that the law is not always just. Anyhow, he became a
comparatively poor man. Besides, he spent what money he had on
travelling. An explorer, out on his own, can’t expect to make money
unless he discovers a gold-mine. And Templeton didn’t. Even if he had,
he’d not the business capacity to make anything out of it. Poor chap!
‘De mortuis,’ eh?”

“Quite so,” said the Canon. After a silence he remarked:

“Are you going to tell the girl—now?”

Anthony Crosby shook his head.

“Not for the moment,” he replied. “I prefer to act professionally. As
a matter of fact, I didn’t bring the will. It’s at my office, and I
had to come straight down here from my home. Besides, there’s a sealed
packet that Templeton handed me just before he sailed—only to be
opened by me in the event of his death. It may contain a codicil, or
even another will. So it wouldn’t be fair to tell her yet, you see.
You won’t say anything about it, will you?”

“Of course I won’t. Must you be going now?”

For the lawyer had risen.

“I must. I’m staying at the ‘Dolphin,’ and I’ve some letters to write.
I shall see you to-morrow—at the funeral. I want to have a
consultation with the police in the morning.”

It was about ten o’clock that evening that the Canon, who had retired
to his study after dinner, came into the drawing-room. His wife and
daughter and Winnie Cotterill were seated there.

“Who was with you in the study, dear?” asked his wife. “I heard Jane
showing someone in.”

“Major Renshaw,” replied her husband, seating himself. “He came in to
have a smoke and discuss the events of the day.”

Mrs. Fittleworth glanced swiftly at Winnie Cotterill. With a woman’s
instinct she knew the girl had had nearly enough strain that day. She
was just going to try to turn the conversation when the Canon went on
in his best parsonical manner that brooked no interruption:

“Of course, I refrained from asking him very much about any possible
clues, and so on,” he said. “The police naturally wish to keep these
things to themselves. But he did tell me something, which isn’t
exactly private, because it’s being talked about at Marsh Quay. There
was a young man lodging at the inn there—the ‘Mariner’s Arms.’ An
artist, apparently, though no one seems to know anything about him.”

“Go on, father,” said Doris; “this sounds most exciting.”

“Well, the strange thing is that he left quite suddenly yesterday
morning—just before the unhappy affair was discovered. The landlady
says he came downstairs very early and announced his intention of
leaving at once.”

The three women were listening intently. The Canon went on:

“He was, it seems, cycling into Frattenbury. But he never went there.
The police have been making inquiries, and only found out this evening
that he stayed last night at Selham—three miles from Marsh Quay down
the estuary, you know. He left there this morning, so they say, and
must have been close to Marsh Quay, because he was seen riding in the
direction of Frattenbury. Then all trace of him was lost again.”

“Oh, daddy, how exciting! Do they think he committed the murder?”

“Well, Renshaw didn’t say that—but, of course, it’s suspicious going
off like that, and the police are making every effort to find him.
They have his description, and it shouldn’t be difficult.”

“Do they know his name?” asked Mrs. Fittleworth.

“They know the name under which he stayed at the inn,” replied the
Canon, “but, of course, it may be a fictitious one.”

“What is it, daddy?”

“Grayson—Harold Grayson.”

“Oh!”

They all turned towards Winnie Cotterill, from whom the exclamation
proceeded. The girl was sitting bolt upright in her chair, her hands
clutching at its arms, her face deadly pale.

“What is it?” asked Mrs. Fittleworth, crossing over to her.

“Oh—it can’t be,” said Winnie in a low voice, half choking. “He
couldn’t have done it—I know he couldn’t have done it.”

“What—do you know him?” asked the Canon anxiously.

The girl nodded.

“If it’s the same—Mr. Grayson. Yes. He was at the Art School with me.
And I’ve seen him since. I—I know him quite well. It’s impossible. Oh,
oughtn’t I to tell the police? It’s dreadful to think of.”

Mrs. Fittleworth, who noticed the deep blush to which the girl’s ashy
cheeks had given place, with a motherly instinct put her arm over her
shoulder.

“Don’t worry, dear,” she said. “The Canon has said the police don’t
necessarily suspect him. If he is really the Mr. Grayson you know—and
he may not be, after all—of course he will be able to explain. You’re
quite done up with all this terrible affair, and I’m going to take you
to bed. Come along.”

“Thank you,” said Winnie gratefully, “you are kind to me. I’m very
silly, I know, but I can’t bear to think that he—he is suspected. I
know he couldn’t have done it.”

“Of course he couldn’t,” said Mrs. Fittleworth soothingly. “Now—I must
insist. You come to bed, dear.”

When the Canon himself went to bed that night he had to listen to a
little lecture. And he took it calmly—from force of habit—much more
calmly than if it had come from the Dean, or even the Bishop. Whereat
it is evident that even for cathedral dignitaries there is a higher
court than the mere ecclesiastical.

“Really, Charles,” said his wife, “you ought to have noticed that the
poor girl had gone through quite enough for one day.”

The Canon tried defensive argument, which was foolish of him—for he
ought to have remembered that he never succeeded.

“But how was I to know, my dear, that she was acquainted with the
young man?”

“Oh, do be reasonable, Charles. You ought not to have mentioned the
subject of the murder at all at that time of night. Doris and I had
been doing our best to get the girl’s mind off it. And then you came
in and started it all again!”

“Why didn’t you stop me, my dear?”

“Stop you!” exclaimed his wife; “stop you when you once begin to hold
forth on a subject. How can anyone stop you? _I_ can’t. There. I know
you didn’t mean to upset her, but you ought to have thought.”

“I suppose I ought,” said the Canon resignedly. “I’m very sorry. Good
night, my dear.”



CHAPTER IX

The Cigar Band

The crowd that had assembled at the inquest at Marsh Quay loitered for
a while discussing the one important topic. Newspaper men were busy
with notebook and camera. The removal of the body of Reginald
Templeton from the “Mariner’s Arms” to the mortuary at Frattenbury,
pending the funeral the next day, was eagerly watched. Members of the
jury, for the most part stolid agricultural labourers or boatmen, were
closely questioned by friends or relatives, but, on the whole,
recognising the importance of their office, were not communicative.

Mr. Proctor refused to say a word to anyone. He came out of the
“Mariner’s Arms,” lighting a cigar as he did so, and walked straight
over to his house opposite, blandly smiling at an irrepressible
reporter who asked him to pose for his camera.

The coroner drove away with the Chief Constable in the latter’s car,
austere and grave as usual. Anthony Crosby, the superintendent and
Colson held a brief consultation in the inn parlour, where it was
arranged that the lawyer should call at the police station the next
morning for further discussion.

“What are you going to do, Colson?” asked the superintendent as he
rose to go. “Are you coming back to Frattenbury?”

“I want to think a bit, sir. I may cycle in later on. But I’m fairly
puzzled just now. There are two men we want to get hold of,
anyhow—this artist chap who was staying here, and Moss, opposite.”

The superintendent nodded.

“We’re bound to do that,” he said. “I expect there’ll be reports when
I get back to the station. Well, I’ll leave you now.”

Everyone else but the detective having left the inn, Mrs. Yates locked
the front door and came into the bar parlour.

“Is there anything I can do for you, Mr. Colson?”

“Yes, please. I should like some strong tea. Then I want you to keep
everyone away.”

“Trust me for that, sir. Not a soul comes into this house till six,
when I’m bound to open. I want to have a little quiet myself, Mr.
Colson. What with all these reporters and people asking questions I’m
fairly bewildered. I hope there won’t be any more murders here as long
as I keeps the ‘Mariner’s Arms,’ I do indeed.”

Seated at the table, drinking his tea, his notebook in front of him,
Detective-Sergeant Colson deliberately and methodically reviewed the
case, making his deductions as he did so, and writing them out
concisely. And this was the result when he finally closed his
pocket-book:

“_Templeton’s object in coming to Marsh Quay._ First, to see Moss.
That requires investigation. Secondly, to see his cousin. We know all
about that. Thirdly, an interview with some unknown person in
Frattenbury, who must have been the last person who saw him before he
was murdered. Why did not that person come forward to give evidence?
But he might not have lived in Frattenbury itself——he might have
spoken, loosely, of the neighbourhood. He might have arranged to see
Moss again—or this artist chap—or even Proctor. They are all possible.

“_Reason for appointment._ He hinted that he was carrying something
valuable. We know what that was. Diamonds. There were probably more
than the one we found. Who has them now?

“_Clues._ Only four at present of any value—possibly only two. (1) The
blotting-paper. Not easy to make out. If deciphered, it might lead to
finding out with whom the appointment was made, or what it was about.
But very uncertain. (2) The diamond. But that only appears to prove
that he had others. (3) The walking-stick. Most important, this. It is
pretty certain that the man who thinks he has recovered it is the
criminal. If only I hadn’t muddled it! (4) The cigar band. I ought to
have spotted that, and not have left it to that confounded parson to
find. There may be something in it, certainly.

“_Possible suspects._ (1) Moss. Why did he leave in such a hurry? The
fact of the murderer being on the spot last night, when he got that
walking-stick, seems to rule Moss out. But not necessarily. He might
easily have run down from London last night. There’s a lot to be
inquired into here. (2) Grayson, the artist. Why did he leave in a
hurry? He’s certainly got to be run to earth. (3) Proctor. Yes—Proctor
puzzles me. Such a cool old chap! He would have known exactly where to
land in that canoe—and, if so, he knew perfectly well that the boy
would find it there in the morning. Also, he’s been in Switzerland.
That stick again! And I thought he was never going to leave off
examining that cigar band at the inquest. We must keep a sharp eye on
Proctor. If he’s not simply a fool, he’s as wily as they make ’em.”

When he had closed his notebook and put it in his pocket, the
detective lighted his pipe and sat, smoking thoughtfully, looking out
of the window. He realised that the case was all the more difficult
because the few clues that he held, and the slight facts he had to go
upon, might equally apply to any one of the three persons he had
enumerated as being suspicious. And if, as it seemed, his work was to
eliminate two of these persons, he was anxious to make no mistake.

Colson was not the detective of fiction. He was simply a shrewd,
careful man, keenly observant, with a police training. Had he been
that brilliant genius which the writer of fiction is so fond of
delineating, he would, after his manner, by this time have made some
supernaturally clever deduction, which would have enabled him to spot
the criminal at once, and to run him down unerringly, with the
additional triumph attached to it that all his colleagues, and every
other person concerned, had been absolutely wrong in their suspicions.
He would, probably, have adopted extraordinary disguises, kept all his
clues and methods to himself, and never have given a hint of them to
his superior officers, and finally have achieved that superlative
climax in which he would have exclaimed, “Alone I did it!”

But Colson was what, in spite of the writers of fiction, is a useful
personage in tracing crime—Colson was a policeman, and he knew the
value of those often-derided police methods. He, for example, could
sit now, calmly smoking his pipe, secure in the knowledge that every
police station in the district was on the look-out for Grayson, the
artist, that in a very short time Moss would probably be found—also by
police methods—and that a little police machinery, which the
superintendent was already putting in hand as a result of their brief
conference after the inquest, would prevent Proctor from slipping away
from the neighbourhood unobserved—if he had any such idea in his mind.

As Colson looked out of the window, half lost in reflections, he
noticed a man detach himself from the little group that still lingered
near the scene of the tragedy, and go walking up the quay, hands in
pockets. It was Tom Gale, the “crew and cook” of the schooner that was
still moored at the quay head, waiting for his cargo.

An idea struck the detective.

“That chap was about all the time,” he argued, “it might be worth
while having another chat with him.”

So he went out, strolled along the quay, and finally stepped aboard
the schooner, where he found Tom Gale in his favourite attitude of
leaning over the bulwarks.

“Well,” he said, as he went up to him, “you gave your evidence well
to-day, my man. We like a witness who speaks out plainly, and you did
it.”

Tom grinned approval of the compliment. Inwardly he was proud of being
in any way mixed up with the case. He knew he could tell the
story—with self-complimentary embellishments—for many weeks in divers
bars, and that many invitations to “have one with me, mate,” would be
the resulting homage.

“Ah,” he said, “I told ’em what I knew. I wish it had been more, sir.”

“So do we all. But what you told us of Templeton crossing the
estuary—and seeing Moss—was important, you know.”

Tom Gale made a mental note of how he could truthfully say afterwards
that if it hadn’t been for him the police would have missed the very
essence of things—the detective himself had told him so—and then
spoke.

“Ah,” he said, “I seen him plain enough. Just over yonder ’twas,” and
he jerked his thumb in the direction of the opposite shore, “that ’ere
little Jew fellow, Moss, he stood on the shore, just there. D’ye think
’twas him as did it, sir?” he asked with relish.

The detective shook his head mysteriously.

“Ah,” he said, “we mustn’t jump to conclusions hastily, you know. So
you saw him plainly, did you?”

“Ah. T’other chap was only just a-askin’ on me who lived in that house
and I was tellin’ on him, when there was Moss himself—I pointed ’im
out.”

“What do you mean by ‘t’other chap’?” asked the detective sharply.

“Why, him as was standin’ just where you might be, sir, at the
time—that young artist feller what was lodging at the ‘Mariner’s
Arms.’”

“Oh!” said Colson, thoughtfully, “he was with you, was he?”

“O’ course he was, sir—now, ought I to ha’ told ’em that at the
inquest? I never thought of it.”

“No, no,” said the other. “It didn’t matter at all. But, tell me. If
this artist—Grayson is his name—was with you, did he recognise Mr.
Templeton when he came back? Or speak to him?”

Tom Gale shook his head.

“No, sir; directly Mr. Templeton started coming across, this here
artist chap went straight back to the inn—looked almost as if he
didn’t want Mr. Templeton to see him.”

“Oh, did it?” said Colson. “Yes, I see.”

He filled his pipe and handed his pouch to the other man. Tom Gale put
his hand in his pocket, ostensibly to get his pipe, and exclaimed:

“’Ullo. I’d forgotten this,” and drew forth a crumpled cigar.

He looked at it ruefully.

“Meant to ha’ smoked him yesterday, bein’ Sunday,” he said; “now he’s
too far gone. I must chop him up and smoke him in my pipe. ’Tain’t
often I gets hold of a cigar, guv’nor.”

Colson, who was looking at the cigar intently, asked him quietly:

“Where did you get it from?”

“That ’ere artist feller we was just a-talkin’ about gave ’im to me,
sir, up yonder in the ‘Mariner’s Arms.’ A good ’un, I reckon, ain’t
he?”

The detective took the cigar in his hand and smelt it. But, all the
time, he was carefully examining the band.

“Yes, it’s good enough,” he said. “Pity you’ve spoilt it. Oh—so
Grayson gave it to you, did he?”

“Yes, sir—Saturday afternoon, we was sittin’ in the bar parlour, me
and him, and he gave ’im to me. He smoked two of ’em while I was
there.”

“Well, look here,” said Colson, “have one of mine instead, to make up
for it.” And he pulled out what he called his “diplomatic cigar case.”
He rarely smoked anything but a pipe himself, but he always kept a few
good cigars in his pocket. He knew their value—when he was in search
of information.

“Take a couple,” he went on.

“Thankee, sir—don’t mind if I do.”

Tom Gale lighted one of them and smoked complacently. The detective
talked volubly and then bid him good afternoon.

“Blowed if he ain’t took that cigar o’ mine with him,” murmured Tom
Gale after he had gone. “Absent-minded like, I’ll ’low. It doan’t
matter, though.”

Colson, who had quietly slipped the crushed cigar into his pocket,
walked rapidly back to the inn. Arrived in the bar parlour, he laid
the cigar on the table, took from his case the band which the Canon
had handed in at the inquest, and carefully compared it with the
other.

A smile lightened his face.

“That’s better!” he exclaimed. “Here’s something to go upon at last.
The same brand, that’s what they are. It’s a good brand, but not
specially exclusive as that idiot of a parson wanted to make out. Same
brand as he smoked, he said. Very likely, but the clergy ain’t got the
monopoly of the cigar trade. Anyhow, this looks convincing. This young
Grayson smoked these cigars, and someone who was aboard the yacht
smoked one of ’em there. It’s good enough to go upon. Mrs. Yates!”

He opened the door as he spoke. The landlady bustled in.

“I’m going back to Frattenbury now. And I shan’t be staying the night
here.”

“Sorry to lose you, Mr. Colson.”

“Can’t be helped, Mrs. Yates. I don’t think there’s anything to keep
me here for the present. Oh—tell me. This young lodger of yours smoked
cigars, didn’t he?”

“He did, sir—as I knows. He was always dropping the ash about—on my
bedroom carpet too.”

“Do your carpets good, if you rub the ash in.”

“Lor’, sir! And the mess he made in the grate, too.”

The detective looked at the grate sharply. On the top of the coals,
that were laid there ready to be lighted, was a sprinkling of cigar
ash and a couple of red and gold bands. He picked them out.

“These came off his cigars, I suppose?”

“They must have, Mr. Colson. It’s few folks ever smokes them things
here. Pipes and ’baccy is what they mostly uses.”

“Quite so. Well, I’ll run up and pack my bag while you get my bill
ready.”

He rode quickly into Frattenbury, in a very cheerful mood, and
reported to the superintendent. That functionary was delighted.

“Good!” he exclaimed. “You’ve done well, Colson. We must have this
Grayson at any price. Thompson has just been in to report that he
stayed at Selham on Sunday and Sunday night—at the ‘Wheatsheaf.’”

“Did he?” exclaimed Colson. “That makes matters clearer than ever. He
was on the spot on Sunday night, eh?”

“He was seen riding into Frattenbury a couple of hours ago,” went on
the superintendent. “We’ll soon have him. He can’t get away by
train—we’ve seen to that. By the way, Colson, the post has just
brought in a letter from the London police about Moss. You’d better
see it.”

He handed a typewritten paper to the detective, who read:

  Isaac Moss. In reference to your inquiries concerning this man, I
  beg to report as follows. He rents a small office at 13a, Hatton
  Garden. Deals in jewels, mostly diamonds, and is well known. Private
  residence, “Fairview,” No. 53, Compton Avenue, Brondesbury. Nothing
  known against him. Possesses passport, as he is frequently in
  Amsterdam. Boats being watched as precaution.

“I sent Tyler up yesterday,” went on the superintendent. “He’s
probably on his track by this time.”

Late that night a message came through from Tyler:

  Tracked our man, and have him under observation.

Colson smoked the pipe of peace at his own fireside that night. His
wife listened attentively as he told her all that he had done that
day.

“Looks promising, doesn’t it?”

She thought for a minute or two before she replied:

“I hope so—for your sake. But there are still difficulties. I want to
know why the little bag with the one diamond was put back in Mr.
Templeton’s waistcoat pocket—if the rest were stolen. And you say
yourself that the cigar band was not a _very_ extraordinary one. Be
careful, dear, won’t you? I want you to come out of this well, you
know——”

Colson smiled grimly.

“All right, old girl,” he said, “I’ll be careful. I know what you
mean. We don’t want to get anyone sent up for trial till we’re quite
certain. It’s too big a risk—and I’m not taking any risks in this
job.”



CHAPTER X

Harold Grayson is Detained

Harold Grayson came down to breakfast on the Tuesday morning in the
little cottage where he had found a lodging in the downland village of
Linderton, some four or five miles north of Frattenbury, profoundly
oblivious of the fact that the stolid-looking policeman who was
digging in his garden directly opposite his lodgings had been,
according to orders, watching the house all night and was yawning
heavily at the prospect of the snooze he would take when the promised
relief came that morning.

For although Harold Grayson had escaped detection for the moment by
riding round Frattenbury instead of through it on his way to the
downs, the net which the superintendent had quietly spread had soon
closed in upon him. That stolid village policeman, Constable Drake, to
wit, already had a description of the fugitive in his pocket, and when
Grayson had alighted from his bicycle the evening before and asked him
where he could get a bed, Drake had recognised the quarry at once.

But Drake was absolutely imperturbable. By never a sign did he
intimate that anything unusual was happening. Instead, he tilted back
his helmet, scratched his head thoughtfully—for he was really thinking
astutely all the time—and said:

“A bed, sir? Well, there’s the ‘Blue Lion,’ but I’m not sure if you’d
like it. It ain’t up to much”—that was because the “Blue Lion” was at
the extreme end of the village, well away from the constable’s
cottage. “Let me see, now. Tell you what, sir. We don’t often have
anyone stayin’ here, but there’s a neighbour o’ mine who lets rooms
sometimes—clean and comfortable they are. You come along o’ me, sir,
and I’ll do what I can for you.”

With a view to his own as well as the artist’s comfort, he led him
straightway to the cottage opposite his own, and, with bland
persuasion, induced the occupant to take in the stranger. Grayson, as
he unstrapped his holdall from his bicycle, gratefully gave him a tip,
which the policeman as gratefully acknowledged.

“Tell you what, sir,” he said, “Mrs. Goring ain’t got much room for
your bicycle. There’s my shed handy. You can put it there if you
like.”

Which Grayson promptly did, and as soon as he had departed Drake
promptly removed the valves—with much satisfaction. Then he went
indoors, slowly and laboriously wrote a letter, which began, “While on
duty at 6.38 p.m. in the main road at Linderton I was accosted,” and
dispatched it by his son, who took it into Frattenbury on his bicycle
and brought out a reply.

That is all that is necessary to say about Police-Constable Drake.
When he got his well-earned snooze he had a vision of sergeant’s
stripes in the future.

As Grayson ate his eggs and bacon he could see the line of downs
opposite and was picturing in his mind a pleasant day’s work, when a
smart motor-car drew up at the garden gate of the cottage and a tall,
military-looking man got out of it, followed by a stiff-looking man in
plain clothes, who took up his position outside the cottage. A moment
later the landlady opened the door of the room and announced:

“A gentleman to see you, sir.”

Grayson rose, surprised.

“Good morning,” exclaimed the newcomer. “Your name is Grayson, I
believe—Mr. Harold Grayson?”

“It is,” replied Grayson; “but I confess I haven’t the honour——”

“I am Major Renshaw, Chief Constable of this district. I fear I have
rather an unpleasant duty to perform.”

“Yes?”

“You were recently staying at the ‘Mariner’s Arms’ at Marsh Quay, I
believe?”

Grayson, looking a little uncomfortable under the penetrating gaze of
Major Renshaw, replied that he was.

“And you left rather suddenly, very early on Sunday morning?”

“I did—but I don’t understand——”

“It was a little unfortunate, Mr. Grayson, that you did so. Please
understand that I am making no charge against you at present, but I
suppose you are aware what took place at Marsh Quay the night before
you left?”

The young man shook his head.

“I don’t know what you mean,” he replied.

“Oh, come now!” said Major Renshaw sharply. “Mr. Templeton’s
murder—you must have heard of it. Everyone’s talking about it, and
you’ve been in the neighbourhood all the time.”

“Mr. Templeton’s murder?” stammered Grayson. “He—he had his yacht
there.”

“I see you know _that_,” said the Chief Constable grimly. “And do you
mean to tell me you don’t know that he was murdered on that yacht?”

“I—I—really I don’t.”

Major Renshaw shrugged his shoulders.

“Perhaps you can explain,” he said coldly. “You must be an
extraordinary young man either to think you can make me believe you
know nothing or to have escaped hearing about it. Perhaps you won’t
mind telling me your movements since you left Marsh Quay?”

“I—I can do that. You may not believe me, and I admit it sounds
strange—but I’ll tell you the facts. I left the ‘Mariner’s Arms’ quite
early, intending to go to Frattenbury. Then I changed my mind and went
to Selham. I put up at the ‘Wheatsheaf’ there. I asked them to give me
some lunch to take out with me—I wanted to do some sketching—I am fond
of being alone—I suffered from shell-shock in the war—and I find it
rests me.”

“Go on,” said the Major, a little more sympathetically now that
Grayson had touched on his erstwhile profession. “What did you do
next?”

“I found my way to a very lonely bit of the coast and sketched. I can
show you the sketches. I particularly wanted to get a sunset effect,
so I waited till then. When I started back I began to feel hungry, and
called at a solitary farm-house, where they gave me bread and cheese
and milk. It was dark when I left and I wandered considerably out of
my way before I got back to the ‘Wheatsheaf.’ When I did, I was
awfully tired. I glanced in the tap-room. There was a noisy crowd
there, so I went straight to bed. I never spoke to anyone.”

“Go on, please. The next morning?”

“I was up early. There was only a girl about, and she got me some
breakfast. Then I paid my bill and rode off.”

“Where?”

“To the lower part of the estuary. I bought some food at a grocer’s
shop in a village I passed through, sketched till the afternoon, and
then rode out here. With the exception of the girl in the morning and
a deaf old woman in the grocer’s shop, I never spoke to a soul all day
till I asked the village policeman here where I could get a bed. Those
are the facts, Major Renshaw. I hope you don’t dispute them?”

The Chief Constable regarded him critically, but did not answer his
question. Instead he asked:

“Did you know this Mr. Reginald Templeton?”

The young man hesitated a little.

“Yes—I did,” he admitted.

“Did you see him to speak to at Marsh Quay?”

“N—no.”

“You knew he was there—you have admitted that already.”

“Yes—I knew he was there.”

“You avoided him, then?”

Grayson nodded.

“Why?”

“Well—you see—we weren’t exactly friends. That’s why I came away. I
didn’t want to meet him.”

“Why?”

After a brief silence the Chief Constable said:

“Well, Mr. Grayson, I told you mine was an unpleasant duty. I make no
charge against you at present, but there are certain ugly facts which
you will have to account for. You are not under arrest—or I should
not, of course, have questioned you—but I am afraid I shall have to
ask you to come back with me to Frattenbury and I must warn you that
you will be detained there, at all events till you can give a further
account of yourself. I am sorry if there is any mistake. I cannot say
more.”

Grayson bowed. He was still very pale and a little agitated. He
recognised the seriousness of his position.

“I understand,” he said quietly, “and of course I cannot refuse to go
with you; but I assure you it is all a mistake.”

“I hope it is,” said Major Renshaw dryly. “You had better bring some
things with you—for your own comfort.”

Just before they were ready to start the Chief Constable suddenly
said:

“Have you any cigars on you, Mr. Grayson?”

The young man pulled out his case.

“These are all I have left. Why?”

“Thank you,” said Major Renshaw, putting the case in his pocket. “I’m
afraid I must deprive you of them.”

“Am I not allowed to smoke?” asked Grayson. “I understood I was not
under arrest.”

Major Renshaw smiled grimly, and as soon as they were in the car
offered his cigarette-case.

“Smoke, by all means,” he said. “I’ll supply you willingly. Only we
rather bar cigars.”

He looked at him keenly as he spoke. But Grayson was lighting a
cigarette quite calmly.

When they arrived at the police station a further examination took
place in the presence of the superintendent and Colson. Grayson, who
had recovered his equanimity by this time, repeated all he had told
the Chief Constable. The superintendent took careful notes.

“We shall make inquiries, Mr. Grayson,” he said, “to verify these
statements so far as the people to whom you say you spoke are
concerned. Now will you tell me, please, something about yourself?”

“In what way?”

“Well, your home.”

“I am at present in lodgings in London. I will give you the address.
My home is just outside Marlow, in Buckinghamshire. My father, who is
a county magistrate, is well known—Mr. Osmond Grayson.”

“What are you doing in this neighbourhood?”

“Sketching, mostly.”

“Did you know that Mr. Templeton was likely to be at Marsh Quay?”

“Certainly not. I have already told you I wished to avoid him when I
found he was there.”

“Why?”

“Because—well, the whole affair is a private matter.”

“You need not tell us unless you wish to, Mr. Grayson,” interposed the
Chief Constable. “But if the rest of your story is correct it will
materially help us to account for your hasty departure.”

“Very well,” said the young man after a moment’s thought, “there is
really nothing to conceal. Some years ago my father was involved in a
lawsuit with Mr. Templeton—and won it. Templeton had to sell his
estate to pay the costs, and my father bought it. He hated the lot of
us, and, I think, justly, because it’s always been my opinion that my
father was not so much in the right as the law said he was. My father
knows I think this. Well, if you want the truth, when I knew that
Templeton was at Marsh Quay I didn’t want him to see me, because I’m a
bit ashamed of the whole affair. I watched to see him come off the
yacht to make quite sure it was he, and when I saw it was, I made up
my mind to leave early the next morning. That’s all there is in it.”

The superintendent nodded thoughtfully.

“You don’t happen to know the name of Mr. Templeton’s solicitors when
this case was tried, I suppose?”

“Yes, I do. Of course I remember. Sir Henry Cateford was his counsel—I
forget the name of the junior—and his solicitors were Crosby and
Paxton, well-known people, I believe.”

The Chief Constable and the superintendent exchanged glances, but
Colson broke in at that moment. “Do you recognise this cigar?” he
asked, showing him the crushed one he had received from Tom Gale.

Grayson examined it.

“It’s the same brand I’ve been smoking lately,” he said. “I couldn’t
swear, of course, that it’s one of my actual cigars. What of it? If I
can explain anything I’m quite willing to do so.”

“Can you tell us if you smoked one of your cigars on board Mr.
Templeton’s yacht, then?” asked Colson.

“I never was on his yacht. Why do you ask?”

The detective did not reply to this. He asked another question:

“Can you account for your movements from ten o’clock on Saturday night
to, say, six o’clock on the following morning?”

“No, I can’t,” replied Grayson.

“Why not?”

“Because I happened to be asleep. I went to bed at the ‘Mariner’s
Arms’ just before ten, and I woke up at a quarter-past six. I can’t
help you there.”

“It was to help you that the question was asked,” said the
superintendent gravely.

The young man gave a short laugh.

“I see what you mean,” he said, “but the same thing applies to a score
or so of people who were sleeping close to the quay that night,
doesn’t it? I can’t prove an alibi any more than they can.”

The Chief Constable shrugged his shoulders, but would not commit
himself.

“Well, Mr. Grayson,” he said, “thank you for all you have told us. I’m
sorry we must detain you for a time, but I hope, for your sake, it
will not be long. Superintendent Norton will do his best to make you
comfortable. We shan’t lock you up in a cell, you know—unless we see
cause to arrest you. But you won’t be allowed to leave the house.”

“Well?” he asked when Grayson was out of the room.

“I’m not satisfied yet,” said Colson. “There’s that matter of the
cigar band. I’d like to have it identified by Canon Fittleworth. I
don’t expect it, but he _may_ help us there.”

The superintendent laughed.

“Don’t be too down on the parson, Colson,” he said. “We’ll see what he
says by and by. Meanwhile, Mr. Crosby ought to be here. He can
identify Grayson’s statement about the lawsuit, sir.”

“Yes,” said the Chief Constable, “I agree.”

A few minutes later Crosby came in, by appointment, and was told of
the detention of Grayson and the statement he had made.

“I can verify all he says about there being ill-feeling between my
late client and Grayson’s family,” he said. “That’s perfectly true. I
don’t know this young Grayson personally, but from what I’ve heard of
him he’s all right. He did splendidly in the war, I know—and he’s had
to pay for it—yes—shell-shock, Major. That’s all right. As to what you
tell me about the cigar band, you’ll get Canon Fittleworth to identify
it, I suppose? Exactly. As it’s a fairly well-known brand, I shouldn’t
think there’s much upon which to build a case; but that’s your
lookout. Whoever the fellow is, I hope you’ll get him. Now, I’m
returning to London immediately after the funeral. I shall come down
to the adjourned inquest, of course. But is there anything else I
ought to know?”

“We’re in confidence, Mr. Crosby?” asked the wary superintendent.

“Of course. As the legal representative of the deceased I shall
naturally observe that.”

“We’d like to show you a few things we found in the cabin, then.
Colson, where are they?”

Colson, who had stipulated that at this juncture no mention should be
made of the walking-stick—he was emphatic on this point—produced the
chamois leather bag, the diamond and the blotting-pad. From the latter
he had transcribed the scraps of writing, in print capitals, onto a
piece of ordinary paper.

The lawyer looked at the exhibits shrewdly.

“Wonder what he was doing with diamonds,” he said. “Of course there
were more than this one. And the bag was not tied up, you say?
H’m—queer! Yes—I see—the first letter you’ve put together very well.
Evidently his appointment with Moss. You’ve got your eye on him, eh?”

“One of us will probably run up to interview him to-morrow,” said the
superintendent. “He’s under observation.”

“Of course—good. And this other bit of writing—— Gad! it’s a poser,
isn’t it? Have you made it out?”

“Not yet,” said Colson.

“I’ll take a copy. I’m rather keen on this sort of thing. I’ll see
what I can make of it. Of course, as you say, it might be of
importance—if in any way it put you on the track of the individual
with whom Templeton had an appointment on Saturday night.” He copied
it carefully. “You’ve allowed for the blank spaces in the original?”
he asked Colson.

“Yes.”

The lawyer studied the letters for a minute.

   a d  ver  zr    ice s  o     ion &  roo
     s is   nal

“There’s one point about it that strikes one,” he said. “I dare say
you’ve noticed it, sergeant. There aren’t many words that have the
letters ZR close together. The only one I can think of is ‘Ezra,’ eh?”

“I thought of that, too, sir.”

The superintendent was looking over the lawyer’s shoulder. He laughed.

“Ezra’s ices!” he exclaimed. “Sounds like an Italian Jew and an
ice-cream barrow!”



CHAPTER XI

The Canon’s Cigars

One can only suppose that the morbid curiosity which always attracts a
crowd of people to the burial of a suicide or victim of a murder
repays the onlookers in some sense or other. It is difficult to say
how it does so. The utmost they see or hear is a glimpse of an
ordinary coffin and the words of the Burial Service.

It was a large crowd that gathered on the Tuesday afternoon to witness
the funeral of Reginald Templeton, which took place in the cemetery a
mile out of Frattenbury. There were few mourners. The Canon’s brother,
a retired colonel, had run down for the occasion and occupied the
leading mourning coach with the Canon himself and Winnie Cotterill.
Crosby and the doctor who had attended the case came in the other.

On the return journey to the city, Winnie Cotterill, who was seated
next to the Canon, remarked:

“It’s a curious thing, Canon Fittleworth, but several times I’ve had
the impression that Frattenbury is familiar to me.”

“Really?”

“Yes,” said the girl. “It’s just come over me now. That view of the
Cathedral spire—and the little stream of water we’ve just crossed—it’s
just as if I’ve seen them before.”

“Perhaps you have,” said the Canon.

The girl shook her head.

“I don’t see how I can,” she replied; “I’ve never been here before, so
far as I know.”

“Well, you see,” said the Canon, with a little pride, “our Cathedral
is pretty well known, and I dare say you’ve seen pictures or
photographs of it. That might account for it.”

“Perhaps,” replied Winnie slowly, “but it doesn’t seem to—it’s that
funny sort of feeling that I’ve been here, don’t you know?”

“Yes, I know,” said Canon Fittleworth, “it’s a psychological
curiosity. I’ve had it myself often. ‘There are more things in heaven
and earth—’ eh, Charles?”

“True. Possibly,” he went on to the girl, “you’ve heard people
describing Frattenbury.”

She laughed.

“I’m afraid you’ll think me very ignorant,” she said, “but I don’t
think I ever heard of Frattenbury till I read about the murder in the
paper yesterday morning. I’ve never even been in the South of
England.”

“We’re not so famous as we thought we were, Miss Cotterill,” said the
Canon with a smile. “What do you think of our War Memorial?”

They were passing through a little square just at the entry of the
city, in the centre of which stood one of those, now familiar,
erections which are to remind people that the Great European War was
characterised by many atrocities.

She looked at it, shrugged her shoulders—it may have been the
expression of an opinion—and then, closing her eyes, said slowly:

“It looks as if there ought to be a big lamp-post there, instead.”

“There was,” replied the Canon dryly. “I don’t know that I didn’t
prefer it. Really, Miss Cotterill, you must have considerable psychic
powers.”

“I never knew it till now.”

A minute or two later they entered the Cathedral precincts, and drew
up at the Canon’s residence. As they got out Mr. Norwood happened to
be passing. He raised his hat and bowed in his stiff, formal manner.
Winnie Cotterill looked at him intently.

“Who was that?” she asked the Canon as they went into the house.

“One of our Frattenbury solicitors—a Mr. Norwood,” replied the Canon.

“It’s that queer sensation again,” remarked the girl. “When he took
his hat off it seemed to me exactly as if I’d seen him before—only
that he’s older or something.”

“Well, it’s quite possible. Although he’s lived all his life in
Frattenbury he’s often in London. One really meets—quite casually—many
people who leave an impression on one.”

“I suppose it’s that,” said Winnie. “It must be—of course.”

“Is his name familiar to you?”

“Not a bit. I never heard it before.”

There were several letters for the Canon lying on the hall table. He
took them up, saying as he did so:

“Tea ought to be ready. I expect you’ll find Mrs. Fittleworth in the
drawing-room. Do you mind telling her I’ll be there in a minute?”

She hesitated.

“Canon Fittleworth?”

“Yes.”

“If you _can_ find out whether the police have done anything—about Mr.
Grayson—before I go, I should be so grateful.”

“I will,” he said. “I’ll go round to the police station immediately
after tea.”

“It’s awfully good of you.”

He nodded and smiled.

“Don’t worry,” he said.

Then, as she went into the drawing-room, he opened his letters. His
face looked grave as he read one of them, a note from the police
superintendent.

  Dear Sir,

  We have detained, on suspicion, the young artist, named Grayson, who
  was staying at the “Mariner’s Arms” at Marsh Quay. I shall be
  grateful if you can kindly make it convenient to call here any time
  between five and six this afternoon. We want you to corroborate a
  small matter. I called this morning, but you were out, and I was
  told you would not be disengaged till after the funeral. Will you
  kindly bring with you one of your cigars similar to that which you
  say contained the band found by you at Marsh Quay?

        Yours faithfully,
          Thomas Norton.

He thought for a moment, and then went into his study and rang the
bell.

“Tell your mistress I want to see her for a minute,” he told the maid.

“My dear,” he said to his wife when she came in, “the police have
written to tell me they have that young man, Grayson, detained at the
police station. I had only just promised Miss Cotterill to go round
after tea and make inquiries, before she leaves. I shall have to go in
any case. They’ve asked me.”

“Poor child,” said Mrs. Fittleworth, “she seems very much concerned
about Mr. Grayson. I think she’s fond of him, Charles. I _hope_ he
isn’t the murderer.”

The Canon shrugged his shoulders.

“That’s not for us to judge,” he said, “nor must we jump at hasty
conclusions. If there’s nothing against him, however, I should like to
be able to tell Miss Cotterill before she goes.” He looked at his
watch. “Her train leaves in less than an hour—and they may keep me at
the police station longer than I thought.”

Mrs. Fittleworth, out of the kindness of her heart, rose to the
occasion.

“She shall stay another night. I’ll persuade her. I like the girl very
much, Charles. You see, if there’s nothing really against the young
man we ought to know in the morning. And if there _is_, well, perhaps
I can comfort her a little.”

The Canon beamed his satisfaction.

“I quite agree,” he said. “Don’t tell her just now that the police
have detained him.”

“Don’t _you_ let it out, dear!” she replied. “Give me five minutes to
persuade her to stay, and then come in to tea.”

Left to himself, Canon Fittleworth opened his cigar cupboard and took
out a box. He was about to place one of the three or four remaining
cigars in his case, when he stopped.

“Yes,” he murmured, “I’ll take the box itself round. I ought to have
thought of that before. It may be useful!”

After tea he went round to the police station and was shown into the
superintendent’s private office, where he found, with that
functionary, Major Renshaw and Colson.

“Sorry to give you the trouble, Canon,” said Major Renshaw, “but we’ve
detained this young man on suspicion, and you may help us. So far, I’m
bound to admit, he’s given a straightforward account of himself. His
story sounded a little thin at first, but we’ve corroborated it as far
as we were able. Only, there’s one point that is dead against him. And
that’s where _you_ come in.”

“What is that?” asked the Canon.

The Chief Constable nodded to Colson to go on.

“Well, sir,” said the detective, “you produced, at the inquest,
yesterday, a cigar band which you stated you found in Mr. Templeton’s
cabin.”

“I did.”

“You would recognise it again?”

“Most certainly. I said, you remember, that it was the same brand as
my own cigars.”

The detective smiled pityingly.

“That may be,” he said with a touch of sarcasm in his voice; “at all
events we want you to tell us now—is this the band?”

And he took from his pocket-case the band which had figured at the
inquest. The Canon took a quick glance at it.

“No. Certainly not!” he exclaimed.

The three men looked at him in surprise. Colson ejaculated:

“Great Scott!”

Then he said:

“Come, sir—it _must_ be.”

“I tell you it isn’t. It’s entirely different. The band I found in the
cabin, and handed in yesterday afternoon, was similar to these.”

And he opened his own cigar box.

“But _this_ is the band you handed in yesterday, sir,” exclaimed
Colson, pointing to the one he had just produced.

“It is nothing of the kind,” said the Canon a little hotly. “I am
ready to swear to that.”

There was a moment or two of intense silence, and then the
superintendent said to Colson:

“Are you _sure_ this is the band you received from the inquest?”

Colson, who, like the Canon, did not relish his integrity being
shaken, replied stiffly:

“Quite sure, sir. I saw the Canon lay it on the table, an——”

“But you didn’t examine it closely then,” broke in the Canon.

“No—but I watched it being passed from man to man of the jury, and
when it was finally put down on the table I didn’t remove my eyes from
it till it was in my hands.”

The superintendent slowly nodded his head.

“You are quite certain, Canon?” he asked again.

“Absolutely. This is _not_ the band I laid on the table.”

Colson gave a low whistle and then pursed up his lips.

“There _may_ be an explanation,” he said, “and a very significant one,
too. But it is most important that these facts do not get about. May
we rely on your discretion, Canon Fittleworth?”

“Decidedly. Of course I shall say nothing.”

“Well—the point is this, Canon Fittleworth. Now that you know so much
I may as well tell you. This young Grayson was smoking a brand of
cigars similar to that off which this particular band, which you
repudiate, came. You will admit it was damning evidence against him.”

“It certainly was,” said the Canon. “I am only too glad to have helped
to clear an innocent man.”

“Yes,” said the Chief Constable thoughtfully, “I suppose—I suppose
this clears him—but——”

Colson, who had sprung to his feet suddenly, interrupted him.

“Wait a bit,” he exclaimed, “I’ll make still more certain. Can I
borrow your motor-bike sir?” he asked the superintendent. “I’ll be
back in twenty minutes—or less.”

The superintendent nodded.

“All right, Colson.”

“I’ll wait till he comes back,” said the Canon. “I am anxious, for
certain reasons, to see this young man set at liberty before I go
home.”

“I’m glad you’re staying,” said the superintendent, who was examining
one of the Canon’s cigars. “I want to have a talk with you about this.
I see what you mean. This is a brand I don’t know at all.”

“I don’t suppose you do,” replied the Canon. “They are not on the
market. A Spanish friend of mine sent them me direct from Cuba.
They’re something very special.”

“Why didn’t you say this at the inquest, sir?”

The Canon hesitated.

“Well—er—I really was so very much taken aback at Norwood’s manner—I
am not accustomed to be spoken to like that—in public. And it made me
forget what I should otherwise have said.”

Again the superintendent addressed him in sorrowful rebuke:

“Oh, Canon Fittleworth! You really _ought_ to have told the jury—or
even if you forgot it at that moment, you _might_ have told us. See
the trouble to which you have put us.”

The worthy Canon bristled a little.

“Why didn’t you come to me?” he asked.

“Well—sir—when we saw what sort of a brand it was, fairly ordinary, we
didn’t think it worth while.”

“Ah,” said the Canon, a twinkle in his eye now, “see the trouble you
have given yourselves! If you’d only remembered that I _said_ it was a
particular brand!”

“Come, Canon,” interposed the Chief Constable with a laugh, “we
mustn’t get acrimonious about it. It’s a little mistake on both sides.
But now what you’ve got to do is to try to remember if anyone else but
yourself smoked cigars taken from that box.”

“Certainly,” replied the Canon, “I can remember at the moment someone
who took a cigar out of my box.”

“Who was it?” asked the Chief Constable eagerly.

“You yourself, Renshaw—last time you dined with me. And you remarked
what an excellent smoke it was.”

“Ha, ha, ha,” laughed the Chief Constable. “You want to fix the murder
on _me_, eh?”

The Canon joined in the laugh.

“Circumstantial evidence, eh?” he said.

“But, seriously, Canon,” went on Major Renshaw, “I don’t expect
you to do it now, but I do ask you to shut yourself up in your
study and make a big effort of memory. It’s wonderful how one can
recall little details if one really tries. Write out the names of
everyone—_everyone_ mind—even the most unlikely persons—to whom you
remember you offered a cigar out of that box. And if you can call to
mind anybody who took away a cigar out of your house without smoking
it, that will be _most_ important.”

“Very well,” replied the Canon, “I’ll do what you suggest. My circle
of friends is a fairly respectable one, however, and I hope I don’t
number a murderer among them.”

Meanwhile Colson had rushed over to Marsh Quay. It was not yet six
o’clock, so the inn was not open. He knocked at the door and Mrs.
Yates let him in. Satisfying himself that there was no one else about,
he said to her:

“As I told you before, Mrs. Yates, I look upon you as an exceedingly
discreet woman. Now, I want you to keep your mouth shut about what I’m
going to ask you.”

“I will, Mr. Colson.”

“You’ve got a good memory, eh?”

“I hope so, sir.”

“Well, try and remember now. This young man who was lodging with you,
what did his luggage consist of?”

“It was placed in a holdall he carried on the back of his bicycle.
There was a satchel in front, and one of them folding things what they
put their pictures on when they paints them.”

“An easel?”

“That’s it, sir.”

“Anything else—an umbrella?”

“No, sir.”

“Or a walking-stick?”

“No, sir.”

“Are you quite sure? I want you to be very careful.”

“I’m quite sure, Mr. Colson, and I’ll tell you for why. First of
all, I helped him undo his luggage when he arrived, and secondly,
he borrowed this here stick—what used to belong to my late
husband—several times when he went out walkin’. I can swear to that.”

The detective glanced at a brown polished walking-stick with a knob at
the end.

“All right,” he said. “That’s all I want to know. And I’ll give you a
bit of information in return. It’s pretty certain _he_ isn’t the man
we want.”

“I’m glad to hear that, Mr. Colson. I liked the young feller.”

The detective had turned to go, but paused a minute.

“It would be better for him still, Mrs. Yates, if you could prove that
he was really in your house all night.”

“Well, sir—I’m sure he was here till past one in the morning.”

“Why?”

“He went to bed just before ten, sir. I had a toothache that night
which kept me awake till just after one. And the way that young man
snored was enough to keep anyone awake—let alone the toothache.”

The detective laughed.

“That’s all right, then.”

“We’ve eliminated one of the three,” he said to himself as he rode
back. “And that’s not a bad bit o’ work, anyhow.”

When he arrived at the police station the Canon was still there. The
detective whispered a few words to the superintendent and Major
Renshaw, and the latter said:

“You’ll be glad to know, Canon, that we needn’t detain this young man
any longer. Would you like to see him before you go?”

“I should, very much.”

When Grayson came in, Major Renshaw shook hands with him.

“We’re quite satisfied about you, Mr. Grayson, and I must apologise
for detaining you. But a stranger who goes off suddenly and
mysteriously from the scene of a murder must expect to rouse
suspicions—and you certainly did. Let me introduce you to my friend,
Canon Fittleworth. You really owe your freedom this evening to
him—though he won’t tell you why, because he mustn’t.”

“I’m sure I’m most grateful to you, sir,” said the young artist to the
Canon.

“Delighted,” replied the latter. “I’m so glad to have been of any use
in getting you out of an awkward predicament.”

“Now, Mr. Grayson,” went on the Chief Constable, “we brought you in
from Linderton this morning against your will. Will you allow me to
send you back in my motor?”

“Well,” replied Grayson, “I think I’ll get a bed in Frattenbury. My
holiday was nearly up, and I shall return to town to-morrow. I can
walk out in the morning and get my machine and the rest of my
belongings.”

“No, you won’t,” said Major Renshaw, anxious to make amends. “I’ll
have them sent in—yes, you’ll be comfortable at the ‘Dolphin’—they
shall be there early to-morrow morning. Good night—stop—let me have
your address in case we want you.”

The Canon, leaving his cigar box with the police, walked out of the
station with Grayson and directed him to the hotel. Then he said:

“As the nearest relative of poor Templeton—I’m his cousin, you know—I
should like to offer you a slight return for all the trouble you’ve
gone through to-day. Will you give us the pleasure of dining with us
to-night—at half-past seven?”

“It’s awfully kind of you, sir—but I haven’t any dress clothes with
me.”

“That doesn’t matter in the least. You will? That’s right, then.
Good-bye for the present.”

And the Canon chuckled as he went his way home. And his wife agreed he
had done the right thing. When the Canon took the young artist into
the drawing-room, just before dinner that night, Winnie Cotterill
looked up with a start—and Grayson’s eyes sparkled.

“Winnie!” he exclaimed, “I didn’t expect to meet _you_ here. This is a
pleasant surprise.”

“Miss Cotterill has been anxious to know about you,” said Mrs.
Fittleworth. “She heard you were in danger of arrest.”

“So I brought you round to show her that you’re really free,” said the
Canon, rubbing his hands.

“I’m most awfully glad to see—you’ve escaped from the police,” said
Winnie. “I _knew_ you couldn’t have done the murder.”

“Come along,” said the Canon. “Mr. Grayson, will you take my wife in
to dinner, please?” and he offered his own arm to Winnie Cotterill.

“You’re a perfect dear, Canon Fittleworth,” said the girl as they
crossed the hall. “How clever you must have been to get him off.”

“Oh, _I_ didn’t get him off, as you call it, Miss Cotterill. I helped
to explain something, that’s all. Now you won’t worry any more.”

“Of course not.”

“I don’t think you need!” said the Canon dryly, a twinkle in his eye
as he spoke.



CHAPTER XII

Fresh Evidence

The three police officials, after the departure of the Canon and
Grayson, looked thoughtfully at each other for a few moments. The
Chief Constable said:

“Well—there’s an end of young Grayson, as far as we are concerned.”

Colson was heard to mutter something beneath his breath that sounded
like “blighted parson.” Then the Chief Constable went on:

“I’ve asked Canon Fittleworth, Colson, to try to remember anyone who
had any of his cigars.”

Colson nodded. He took one of the Canon’s cigars out of the box,
looked at it, put it in his case, and carefully examined the label on
the outside of the box.

“Well?” asked the superintendent.

“I don’t altogether depend on the Canon, sir. Other people might get
hold of these cigars as well—if they’ve friends in Cuba, or are in the
trade. Of course I agree with you, sir,” he went on to Major Renshaw,
“and we must take note of anyone who had a cigar from the Canon. But
it isn’t _there_ I fancy that we shall find our man. May I venture to
give an opinion?”

“Do,” said the others.

“Well, it’s fairly obvious that the original cigar band was changed
while passing round the jury. I’ve got my suspicions—but I won’t say
just now.”

“Ought we to tell the coroner, and get the jury—or any suspected
person on it—dismissed?” asked Major Renshaw.

“By no means, sir. That’s what I was just coming to. The man who
changed that band should be the same as the individual who went after
the walking-stick. We don’t want to rouse his suspicions at this
stage. Let him think the band has gone the same way as the stick—that
we’ve lost both clues.”

“How?” asked the superintendent.

“By making it public, just so far as we choose, and no farther. The
blight—the Canon’s bungled it up till now. If he’d only given us that
band, instead of producing it at the inquest, we could have kept it
dark. As it is, every newspaper’s got a head-line with ‘The Cigar Band
Clue—What are the Police doing?’ and all that rot. Well, let’s keep it
up. Let the public think we’ve tested the clue and that we’re
satisfied there’s nothing in it.”

“There’s a lot in what he says,” remarked the superintendent to the
Chief Constable, who nodded agreement.

“Let the newspaper fellows know this—give ’em an ‘official statement.’
They love that. And if you, sir,” to Major Renshaw, “could mention it,
casual like, it would help.”

“I’m dining out at Mr. Norwood’s to-night,” said the Chief
Constable—“one of what he calls his bachelor dinners. Dr. Hazell is
sure to be there. He’s the biggest gossip in the place. It will be all
over Frattenbury to-morrow if I mention it—ha, ha—‘on the authority of
the Chief Constable.’”

“That’s exactly what I want, sir,” said the detective eagerly. “It’ll
give more weight locally than all the newspapers. And I’ve got a sort
of inspiration that we haven’t to go out of the district to find our
man.”

“Unless, after all, it should happen to be Moss?” said the Chief
Constable.

“He’s not really out of the district—and we’ll see him to-morrow,”
replied Colson.

“If there’s nothing to keep us here, we’re both going up to London
to-morrow morning,” explained the superintendent. “Oh, and by the way,
sir, all known dealers in rough stones have been warned—and there’s an
eye being kept on certain fences. Not that it’s likely that the
murderer—if he’s got the stones—would sell them just now.”

“And it’s probable that they’re not far off,” said Colson dryly.

“Well,” said the Chief Constable, rising from his seat, “I’m off. I
must dress for dinner. If you want me, Superintendent, ring up
Norwood, he’s on the phone. I shall be there till about eleven.”

The little dinners which Francis Norwood gave periodically were as
stiff and formal as Francis Norwood himself. But they were always
good, and his port was of excellent vintage. There were four guests
that night—all of the male sex. The coroner rarely invited ladies, and
then only the wives of his intimate friends. He sat, stiff and erect,
at the head of the table, on his right Major Renshaw and Sir Peter
Birchnall, a local magnate and magistrate, on his left a clean-shaven,
round-faced man of short but rather portly dimensions, who was the Dr.
Hazell referred to by the Chief Constable, and a comfortable-looking
clergyman, the Reverend Alfred Carringford, the vicar of the parish in
which the coroner resided.

The maid—Norwood had no men-servants—had just put on the dessert with
its accompaniments of wine and a box of cigars. Norwood passed round
the port, and helped himself when it reached him again.

Sir Peter held his glass up to the light, took a sip, and smiled
approvingly.

“’72, if ’m not mistaken, Norwood?”

Norwood nodded.

“Yes,” he said. “I’m sorry to say I’ve only a few more bottles left.
And it’s too heavy a price to-day, even if there’s any on the market.”

Dr. Hazell raised his eyebrows and shook his head knowingly. Norwood
was reputed to be a wealthy man, and the little doctor was sceptical.

“If you want to replenish your cellar, I can put you on to a good
thing, Norwood,” went on Sir Peter.

“Indeed?”

“Buy ‘Virginian Reefs.’ They’re bound to go up. I happen to have seen
the engineer’s latest report. It’s a safe thing.”

“‘Virginian Reefs,’ eh?” said Dr. Hazell, taking out his notebook.
“You recommend them, do you, Sir Peter?”

“I hold some myself,” replied the Baronet pompously, and with the air
of one who could not be wrong.

Norwood shook his head and smiled his dry little smile.

“We lawyers are not over-keen on speculation,” he said. “‘Virginian
Reefs’—yes. I imagined they were in low water.”

“Seven and sixpence was yesterday’s price, but they’ll go to three and
four pounds. The general public know nothing yet, of course. This is
the chance for picking them up.”

Norwood, who was peeling an apple, at this point sent round the
cigars. Carringford remarked as he lighted one:

“That was a strange circumstance—the discovery of that cigar band by
Fittleworth in that Marsh Quay case.”

He looked at Norwood as he spoke. The coroner replied stiffly:

“You can’t expect me to discuss that, Vicar.”

“I suppose not,” said the doctor, “but it was a queer thing, as you
say, Carringford. I suppose, Major,” and he leaned his elbows on the
table and looked across at the Chief Constable, “I suppose the whole
thing is keeping you pretty busy?”

“Naturally,” replied Major Renshaw, cutting and lighting his cigar.

“Now here,” and the doctor held up the band he had just removed from
his own cigar, “here is an innocent enough looking thing, and yet it
might hang a man in this case, easily enough. You policemen have to
note the merest trifles—well, just as we doctors do sometimes. A tiny
symptom, Major—the flutter of an eyelid, a pain in the little finger,
so to speak—but we know it points to a fatal disease. And I suppose
you attach the greatest importance to this bit of red paper. It’s
_the_ clue, isn’t it?”

“Oh, come now,” said Sir Peter, “you’re asking leading questions of
the police. It won’t do, Doctor.”

Major Renshaw removed the cigar from his mouth, puffed a volume of
smoke across the table, and said: “Oh, I don’t know. As a matter of
fact, I don’t mind saying that we attach very little importance to
that cigar band.”

“Really?” asked the coroner, sipping his port. “I confess I shouldn’t
have thought that—though I don’t wish of course, to give an opinion.”

“No,” went on the Chief Constable, “I don’t think there’s much in it.
And, as a matter of fact, we’ve tested it already. The brand was more
common than Canon Fittleworth led us to suppose, and, after all, very
likely had nothing to do with the murder at all. It might have been in
the cabin for days.”

“Dear me,” said the doctor, who was listening intently. “That’s rather
a disappointment to you, isn’t it?”

The Major shrugged his shoulders.

“It’s not much use following up such a very doubtful clue,” he
admitted.

Norwood apparently did not care for the subject of the murder to be
discussed. In his position as coroner this was natural. He addressed a
counter-remark across the table to Carringford:

“I’ve just read the speech you made at the Diocesan Conference on
Parochial Church Councils, Vicar. You must let me congratulate you.”

The clergyman, pleased with the compliment, was launching forth on
matters ecclesiastical—to the intense boredom of Sir Peter—when the
maid entered.

“Please, sir, someone wants to speak to Major Renshaw on the
telephone.”

“You know where it is, Major—in the hall,” said Norwood.

“Thanks.”

The Chief Constable went to the telephone.

“Hullo—yes——”

The voice of the superintendent replied.

“Can you come at once, sir? It’s important.”

“All right.”

“I’m sorry, Norwood,” he said, as he went back into the dining-room,
“but I’ll have to go—I’m wanted.”

“Anything fresh—about the murder?” asked Dr. Hazell.

“I don’t know.”

“Ah,” said the doctor, pointing a finger at him, “you and I both get
rung up in our professions. Only there’s a difference. They call me up
to save lives—and they summon you to help in catching an unfortunate
wretch for the gallows, eh?”

“Perhaps. Good night,” replied the Chief Constable.

When he reached the police station he found the superintendent,
Colson, and a strong odour of stale beer, which emanated from the
mouth of a peculiar individual. He was a rough-looking man of about
forty, dressed in old, patched, corduroy breeches, brow leather
gaiters, and a big, loose jacket, well-worn. He had a very red,
beery-looking face, unbrushed black hair and whiskers, and a pair of
sharp-looking dark eyes like a ferret’s. The Chief Constable looked at
him and said severely:

“It’s you, is it, Thatcher? What mischief have you been up to now?”

The man shifted his dirty, soft hat from one hand to the other, and
replied in a surly, thick tone of voice:

“I ain’t done nothin’, Major—s’elp me I ain’t. I’ve told ’im what I
come ’ere for.”

And he jerked his head towards the superintendent.

“It’s all right, sir,” said that functionary, “he’s come of his own
accord this time. He wants to make a statement.”

“What about?”

“That ’ere murder—over at Marsh Quay,” said Thatcher.

“What do you know about it?”

“Look ’ere, Major,” replied Joe Thatcher, “I doan’t say as how I ain’t
got into trouble time and agen. _You_ knows that. And I ain’t given to
have naught to do with the police as long as they lets me aloane—which
they doan’t always do, damn ’em! But I draws the line at murder, I
does. I doan’t hold with it, and that’s why I come here to-night.”

“Go on. What have you got to tell us?”

A wicked, artful leer broke over the man’s face. “If I tells you what
I knows—you woan’t ask me what I was a-doin’ of that night? I doan’t
want to come up before the beaks just because I was havin’ a
constitootional, as they calls it, when other folks were asleep.”

“All right, Thatcher,” said the superintendent. “We’ve got your
record, and we know pretty well what you’re up to when you take your
midnight walks abroad. But you needn’t fear in this case. If you’ve
got any information about the murder at Marsh Quay we’ll forget the
rest.”

“That’s what my missus said, she did. I told her what I seen—and she
says, ‘You go and tell the police, Joe.’ I kept on sayin’ I wouldn’t,
and that’s why I didn’t come afore. An’ she kept a-naggin’ on me, till
I saw life was going to be a little hell if I didn’t come. And here I
be.”

“Go on, my man,” said the Chief Constable encouragingly. “There’s
nothing to be afraid of; tell us about it.”

“Well, ’tis like this. Saturday night I went out for a walk—late. I
doan’t say as I hadn’t a gun wi’ me—but that’s naught to do wi’ it—be
it?”

“Nothing at all,” said Major Renshaw with a laugh.

“I got down and round about them stubble-fields and spinneys along
near the quay—but I didn’t have no luck.”

“No,” said the Major dryly. “We had a big shoot there last week, and
cleared out most of the birds.”

“So I found,” said the poacher brazenly. “Now—that ’ere wood, t’other
side o’ the water. Sometimes there’s a goodish few—sparrers, we’ll
say—to be found there, and it wouldn’t ha’ been the first time as I’d
borrowed one o’ they canoes and slipped over for an hour or so. O’
course I returned the canoe when I’d finished. I ain’t no thief—thank
Gawd!”

The others grinned at him, but were silent. It was best for the man to
tell his story in his own way.

“It was between half-past twelve and one as I got down to the quay—I
allus reckons to know the time within a few minutes—’tis a habit o’
mine. There was no one about and ’twas a still night. There was a
light on board that ’ere little yacht where the murder was, but I
didn’t hear any sound. I was a-standin’ on the quay, a-makin’ up my
mind whether ’twas worth while crossing over, when I heard the sound
of a boat bein’ pulled across—from the other side.”

“From the _other_ side?” asked Colson.

“That’s right. I wondered what anyone was a-doin’ that time o’
night—when respectable folk ought to be abed and asleep.” He grinned.
“I can see pretty well in the dark—I _has_ to in my perfession—so I
jist lay low and watched. Whoever it was, he warn’t no boatman, by the
way he mucked that ’ere boat about. The tide was flowin’ in and he had
to pull hard. When he got across he made straight for that ’ere yacht
where the lights was burnin’. Clumsy, he was, too. He didn’t ’arf bump
the nose o’ his boat into the yacht when he got to her. You could hear
the bang all over the place.”

“What did he do then?”

“Why, Major, he got aboard the yacht and went in the cabin. I see him
quite plainly. But he never stayed there long. In less than five
minutes he was out again, clamberin’ into the boat, and pullin’ away
across stream as hard as ever he could go. Seemed in a mighty hurry,
he did. Just then I heard the Cathedral clock strike one.”

“What did you do?”

“I lit a pipe and waited a bit—quarter of an hour or less, I reckon. I
was thinkin’ it wouldn’t do to cross over to the wood that night. And
then the motor-car come along.”

“The motor-car!” ejaculated the superintendent.

“Yes, sir—come down the road.”

“To the quay?”

“No, sir. It stopped about thirty or forty yards before it got to the
quay. I could see the lights.”

“Did you see who was in it?”

“No, sir; I made tracks along the shore. Thinks I, ‘There’s too many
folks about to-night for an honest chap to get a livin’,’ so I come
straight home. And that’s all about it.”

They questioned him sharply, but he stuck to his story. Then the
superintendent said:

“You’ll probably have to tell all this to the jury—at the adjourned
inquest.”

“It won’t get me into no trouble?” asked Thatcher.

“No,” said the superintendent. “We’ll see to that.”

“Because,” went on the man as he rose to go, “I’ve got my reputation
to think of.”

“We know all about that. And look here, Thatcher, keep your mouth
shut,” said the superintendent.

“How about the boats on the opposite shore?” asked the Chief Constable
when Joe Thatcher had departed.

“There’s only one,” replied Colson, “belonging to Moss.”

“Yes—to Moss,” said the superintendent thoughtfully. “It looks ugly
for him. We’ll see this Isaac Moss to-morrow morning.”

“I shall have to run down to Marsh Quay early before we start,”
remarked Colson.

“What for?”

“A little matter I want to look into. I wish this chap Thatcher had
told us all this before.”

“It doesn’t matter much,” said the superintendent. “It’s just as well
to have cleared off Grayson first. It leaves us a freer hand. I wish
we knew more about that motor.”

And the others agreed.

Early the following morning Colson was at Marsh Quay. He sought out
Jim Webb, who was still in charge of the _Firefly_, sleeping aboard
her, till he received instructions from her owner at Salcombe.

“Webb,” he said, “I want you to row me over opposite.”

“All right, sir.”

“Pull to the yacht first. I want to see something.”

He made Webb pull him all round the yacht till he found what he
wanted.

“What do you make of this?” he asked, pointing to an indentation in
her sides. The paint, especially the narrow green band, was badly
rubbed, and the woodwork a little crushed. “Was this done before you
came here?”

“No, sir. I’m sure it wasn’t. I noticed it on Monday. Some of them
reporter chaps—or someone—must have banged into her. They’ve been
swarming about the place.”

“Might have been caused by the nose of a boat running into her, eh?”

“That’s exactly what I think, sir.”

“All right, we’ll go across now.”

When they reached the farther shore he made for the small boat which
was moored to the landing-stage, and examined her carefully. On her
bows was a distinct smear of green paint.

“Humph,” said the detective, “that seems to bear out Thatcher’s story.
That’s the boat, sure enough. Webb,” he went on, “wait here five
minutes, will you? There’s something I want to do.”

“Yes, sir.”

Colson disappeared along the pathway through the wood, carrying under
his arm a long, thin brown-paper parcel he had brought. He began to
unroll it as he went along.

In ten minutes or so he returned, the parcel under his arm, wrapped up
once more. His brows knit and he was not looking best pleased. He
hardly spoke to Jim Webb, and when he landed at once rode off on his
bicycle.

“That’s a frost,” he muttered to himself; “at least, it looks like
one. Anyhow, we’ll see presently what Moss has got to say. He must be
the man who crossed over to the yacht that night. It’s pretty
suspicious. But things don’t altogether fit—though they _may_ of
course.”



CHAPTER XIII

Isaac Moss Explains

Standing on the platform of Frattenbury Station, waiting for the
London train, were Harold Grayson and Winnie Cotterill. The
superintendent, who was in plain clothes, raised his hat.

“Good morning, sir,” he said with a smile. “I hope you won’t think we
are shadowing you up to town!”

“Oh, good morning, Superintendent. It certainly looks as if I hadn’t
quite escaped from your suspicions.”

“Yes, you have, sir, I’m glad to say.”

“Let me introduce you to Miss Cotterill. She is interested in this
case.”

The superintendent raised his hat again and bowed.

“I’m sorry, Miss Cotterill,” he said, “if we’ve caused you any anxiety
about Mr. Grayson.”

She blushed a little as she replied:

“I confess it was a relief when Canon Fittleworth told us last night
that Mr. Grayson was free.”

An amused look lingered for a moment on the policeman’s face as he
glanced from one to the other.

“I’m more than ever pleased that our suspicions were unfounded,” he
said in a dry manner. “Here comes your train, sir. Are you both going
up to London?”

“We are,” said Grayson.

The police superintendent found an empty compartment and showed them
in.

“Good morning,” he said. Then he turned to Colson, who was standing
near. “Come along, Colson. You and I won’t disturb that young
couple—and I hope nobody else will. We’ve both been in it ourselves,
eh?”

There were other people in their compartment, so they maintained a
rigid silence on the subject in hand. Colson was not sorry. He wanted
to study the notes in his pocket-book and to think things out. Arrived
in London, they took a taxi to Scotland Yard, and, after an interview
with the authorities there, went on to Hatton Garden, where they found
Tyler lounging about, also in plain clothes.

“Moss went into his office over an hour ago,” he said. “You’ll find
him there.”

The superintendent nodded and, followed by Colson, entered a block of
offices and found his way to an upper floor. A door with ground glass
panels bore the inscription “Mr. Isaac Moss.” The superintendent
opened it without knocking, and they found themselves in a little
outer office. A girl, seated at a typewriter, rose hastily.

“Is Mr. Moss in?”

“He’s particularly engaged, sir. He can’t see anyone.”

“Oh—indeed! But I must see him.”

“I’m afraid you can’t,” said the girl. “He told me not to let anyone
in—that I didn’t know.” The superintendent smiled at the girl’s
ingenuousness.

“Well,” he said, “I’m afraid I must make you disobey orders. I’m a
police superintendent.” The girl paled a little, and went towards an
inner door marked “Private.”

“I’ll tell him,” she said.

But the superintendent was too quick for her. He was across the room
in a moment.

“You must do what I tell you,” he said. “Open the door. Don’t be
afraid.”

As she opened the door a voice exclaimed:

“Who is it? I told you I couldn’t see anyone.”

“I’m afraid we must come in, all the same, Mr. Moss,” said the
superintendent, entering the room and followed by Colson.

A little dark man of evident Jewish persuasion, with a thin, black
moustache, half rose from the chair in which he was seated. His face
was deadly pale, his mouth was half open and his lips quivering.

“Who are you?” he asked, his voice shaking. “I don’t know you.”

“It’s all right, Mr. Moss,” broke in the superintendent closing the
door, turning the lock and putting the key in his pocket. “I almost
think you might have expected me to call. I’m Superintendent Norton,
of the Frattenbury police”—he laid his card on the table—“and this is
Detective-Sergeant Colson.”

Then occurred a pitiable exhibition. Mr. Isaac Moss sank back in his
chair, a cold sweat breaking out on his forehead, wringing his hands
in a paroxysm of fright.

“I never murdered Mr. Templeton,” he said. “I don’t know anything
about it. I wasn’t there. I tell you it’s no use you arresting me—I’m
innocent. I never touched him. I knew you’d come. Oh,” he moaned, “I
knew you’d come, but I never murdered him, I tell you.”

“Come, come, Mr. Moss,” said the superintendent in a soothing tone, “I
haven’t made any charge against you yet. I warn you that the way
you’re going on will do you no good. Pull yourself together. I want to
ask you some questions. Why, we detained a man yesterday who had every
cause to be alarmed, with the facts there were against him, and he
took it coolly enough.”

“He’s the man!” shrieked Moss. “He must be the man. You haven’t let
him go, have you? Why do you come to me? He’s the man, I tell you.”

Colson regarded the little writhing wretch with contempt mingled with
pity. In his mind he was saying: “_He_ hasn’t got spunk enough to stab
a fellow—even in his back.”

The superintendent looked round the room.

“You don’t happen to have any whisky—or brandy handy, do you?”

Isaac Moss sprang to his feet.

“Yes, I have,” he cried. “You shall have a drink—of course you shall
have a drink. You see it was the other man, don’t you? Here——”

He had dashed to a cupboard and produced a bottle of whisky, a siphon
and glasses. One of the latter fell to the floor with a crash. The
superintendent poured out a stiff portion of the spirit, filled the
glass up with soda-water and handed it to the terrified man.

“Drink it,” he said. “Sit down now, and pull yourself together.”

Moss gulped down the contents of the tumbler and sat looking at them.
A slight colour came into his cheeks, but he was still trembling. The
superintendent waited.

“What do you want?” asked Moss presently, in a slightly calmer tone of
voice.

“Well, in the first place, bear in mind that I haven’t arrested you. I
want to ask you some questions.”

As a matter of fact he had come determined to take Moss into custody.
But he was accustomed to dealing with criminals, and had already half
made up his mind that he need only detain him. And Moss had had fright
enough as it was.

“Go on,” said the Jew faintly.

“Well, then, will you tell us why you left your house near Marsh Quay
so early and so suddenly on Sunday morning?”

“I didn’t leave it suddenly,” said Moss. “I had business in
London—important business. I often come up on Sunday morning by that
train.”

“It won’t do, Mr. Moss,” said the superintendent, shaking his head.
“We know you gave a sudden and unexpected order for your car early
that morning. We know you are not in the habit of coming up to town on
Sunday at all. For your own sake you’d better tell us the truth and
hide nothing.”

The little man wiped the sweat off his brow.

“Yes,” he said, “I’ll tell you the truth. I came away because I was
frightened. So help me God, that’s true.”

“Frightened of what?”

“Lest I should be accused of being mixed up in Mr. Templeton’s
murder.”

“How did you hear of his murder?”

“My man told me—early Sunday morning.”

“It won’t do, Mr. Moss,” repeated the superintendent. “You had left
the house before it was known that the murder had taken place. Come—if
you can’t tell me the truth, I shall have to take you away.”

Isaac Moss wrung his hands.

“No—no!” he cried, “don’t do that. My man didn’t tell me. That was a
lie. But I knew—I tell you I knew.”

The superintendent looked at his notebook for a moment. Then he spoke.

“It would help us—and you, too—if you would tell us what you were
doing on board Mr. Templeton’s yacht at one o’clock on Sunday
morning.”

Moss started to his feet again.

“I wasn’t there,” he cried. “You’re mistaken. I wasn’t there.”

“You _were_ there,” said the superintendent sternly. “I’ll give you
one more chance of speaking the truth, and if you don’t I’ll charge
you with the murder of Reginald Templeton and take you into custody.”

The wretched man sank into his chair again. Then he said, almost in a
whisper:

“Very well, then—I was there.”

“That’s better,” said the superintendent. “We’ll go into that further
in a moment. Now then,” and he made a shot in the dark, “what have you
done with the diamonds you took from Mr. Templeton?”

A little to the surprise of the two policemen the Jew, who was growing
calmer under the influence of the stimulant, rose from his seat,
unlocked a safe, took from it a small leather bag, very much like the
one that had been found on the dead man, and poured its contents on
the table.

“There they are,” he said, “all but one—and that was the cause of the
trouble.”

“You stole these diamonds?”

“_Stole_ them!” cried Moss. “_I_ steal! Of course I never stole them.
Ask anybody about me, and they’ll tell you I’m a regular dealer in the
stones. Besides—I gave Templeton the receipt for them. Didn’t you find
it? He put it in his pocket-book. I saw him do it.”

The superintendent looked at Colson, who elevated his eyebrows, but
said nothing. Both men were a little out of their reckoning. Then the
superintendent said to Moss:

“See here, Mr. Moss. We police have a duty to do, but no innocent
person need be afraid of us. We only want to secure the guilty. And
we’re always ready to help the innocent when we can. We know you were
on Mr. Templeton’s yacht—we know he had been with you on Saturday
afternoon—and we know you left in the devil of a hurry and took these
diamonds with you. You will serve your purpose, and ours, best by
telling us all you know.”

Isaac Moss took out his cigarette case.

“Do you mind if I smoke?”

“By all means.”

He poured himself out some more whisky, drank it and said:

“Where do you want me to begin?”

“At the point when you had an interview with Templeton on Saturday
afternoon. Tell us _why_ he came to you.”

“It was about these diamonds. I am agent for a firm in South Africa,
Ehbrenstein & Co.—a well-known firm. They wrote telling me they had a
consignment of uncut stones which they wished me to take to
Amsterdam—to be cut, in the usual way of business. We are always very
careful, of course, in these consignments, and if there is anyone well
known to the firms or dealers coming over, it is a common thing to ask
him to bring them. My letter of advice told me that Mr. Templeton—whom
I knew slightly—would bring them over, and that I was to give him the
receipt on delivery. It would, of course, be a matter of commission
for him. The letter also said that he would communicate with me when
he reached England. He didn’t at first. I knew the boat on which he
was sailing had arrived in Plymouth, and grew anxious, especially as I
knew that Templeton was an erratic and peculiar man, with little
regard for business methods. Then I heard from him—from Poole—saying
he was yachting on the South Coast, probably finishing up at a little
place called Marsh Quay, when he would run up to town and deliver the
stones. He also told me to write to him at the G.P.O., Ryde, if I had
anything to say. I was getting still more anxious, and wrote at once,
suggesting that as, by a coincidence, I had a week-end place at Marsh
Quay, he should bring me the stones there. I described exactly where
my house stood. He replied saying he would be with me on Saturday
afternoon.”

“Yes, we know that,” said the superintendent.

“I was sitting on my lawn when he came. We talked a bit there, and
then went into the house—into my study, and had a whisky and soda
each. It was there that he produced these stones—in a little bag like
this one—and I turned them out on the table and counted them. There
were thirty-two—the correct number. I put them back in the bag and
gave him the receipt. Just before he went he said, ‘I’d like to keep
that little bag. I’ve carried it a good many hundred miles.’ I said,
‘Certainly.’ I unlocked a drawer in my writing-desk, emptied the
stones into a little tin box, locked it up and gave him the bag. Then
I walked down to my landing-stage and watched him row back to his
yacht. That was the last I saw of him—alive.”

He drank a sip or two out of his glass; he was beginning to get
agitated again.

“Take your time,” said the superintendent. “Tell us everything, mind.”

“Yes, I will. When my wife and I went to bed that night it was
late—after twelve. I took the little box containing the stones with
me—I have a small safe in our bedroom. Before I put them away the
thought struck me that I would count them. To my horror, there were
only thirty-one—one of the largest was missing. You must remember that
these stones are worth a considerable sum, and I only hold them as
agent—but I am responsible for them. My wife and I talked it over, and
came to the conclusion that I must have left one stone in the bag when
I emptied them out the second time. I was in a dilemma. For all I
knew, Templeton might be off with the tide very early the next
morning—he hadn’t told me his movements. Then I looked out of the
window—you can see across the estuary over the trees. I could make out
a light. Now, I know the position of the lights there, and I knew at
once it couldn’t be the inn or the house in which—what’s his name?—the
old retired cigar merchant lives. Yes?”

Colson had sprung to an upright position on his chair.

“What’s that you say?” he asked. “A cigar merchant? Who?”

“Why—he lived in the house opposite the ‘Mariner’s Arms’—ah—Proctor’s
his name. Didn’t you know?”

“Was he in the cigar trade?”

“Yes—till about two years ago. I knew him slightly up here; in fact,
it was I who told him about that house of his being for sale.”

Colson gave a low whistle and exchanged glances with the
superintendent.

“Sorry I interrupted. Go on, Mr. Moss.”

“Well, from the position of the light, I guessed it must be on
Templeton’s yacht, and that he had not yet turned in. I didn’t know,
as I told you, whether he might not be off—even soon, for the tide
would be on the turn between one and two. And I hadn’t the slightest
idea how to get hold of him if he left, so I said to my wife, ‘I’ll
get that stone now. Templeton’s evidently on his yacht.’ ‘How?’ she
asked. ‘Why,’ I replied, ‘it’s quite simple; it’s only a question of
pulling over in the boat.’ At first she was rather inclined to
dissuade me, but she saw how anxious I was to get the stone back, so
at last she said, ‘Well, hurry up, then, Isaac, and get it over. I
want to go to sleep—and don’t stop gossiping with Mr. Templeton.’”

“And you went?” put in the superintendent.

Moss nodded, took a drink and went on.

“I did. It wasn’t so easy as I thought. The tide was running in hard,
and I’m not much of a hand with a boat. I had to pull with all my
might, and when I got to the calmer water, where the yacht lay, I
still pulled so hard that I ran into her with a bit of a bump. I was
rather surprised that no one took any notice; it must have shaken
her.”

“Well, I fastened my boat to the yacht and got aboard. There wasn’t a
sound. The cabin door was open, and I went in. The hanging lamp was
burning. I looked round, and there I saw Templeton lying on the
floor—face downwards. At first I thought he was asleep, or drunk. Then
I stooped down. Ah, my God—it’s haunted me ever since!”

He leaned forward for a moment and covered his face with his hands.
Then he went on.

“There was a pool of blood on the floor; he was dead.”

“Yes—and then?” asked the superintendent.

“I—I—thought I should have fainted. I sat down on one of the bunks for
a minute. Then the horror of the thing took hold of me. If I were
discovered—what would be the position? It flashed across me
instantly—that dark night—no one else about—I saw it all. They would
think _I_ did it.

“I got out of that cabin in a panic and into my boat. I don’t know how
I managed to get across—it seemed hours—and I pulled till my arms
ached with pain. As soon as I reached my house I ran upstairs and told
my wife what had happened. She was as frightened as myself—she saw the
danger. We neither of us got a wink of sleep that night. We kept
talking it over, and at last we both agreed that the wisest thing to
do would be to get away very early in the morning—we hoped before the
discovery was made.”

“The worst thing you could have done,” interposed Colson. “It
naturally drew suspicion upon you at once. We knew Templeton had been
with you in the afternoon, and one of the first things we did was to
try to get hold of you—and found you’d bolted.”

“I know—I know,” said Moss. “I’ve been in terror ever since. I’ve sat
in this office, trying to do business, and expecting every moment to
see the police come in—it’s been agony.”

“What you ought to have done,” said the superintendent, “was to give
the alarm—at Marsh Quay—directly you discovered the body.”

“Yes—yes—but even suppose I had—wouldn’t you have suspected me? I
don’t know. I don’t know.”

The superintendent did not answer. He was thinking what _he_ would
have done, if he had been a nervous, cowardly man in a like
predicament. And he had to agree, mentally, that the Jew had acted
according to his natural temperament.

“That’s the whole truth, so help me God!” said Moss earnestly, “and
I’m glad I’ve told you now; it’s a blessed relief. I couldn’t have
gone on much longer. What are you going to do with me?” he asked,
throwing out his hands in appealing gesture.

The superintendent did not reply for a moment. He was considering.
Then Colson whispered something to him, and he nodded.

“Sergeant Colson wants to ask you a question—before we decide
anything.”

“Yes?” said the Jew.

“I may as well tell you,” said Colson, “that you have been under
strict observation for the last few days. But there’s one thing I want
to know. When you and your wife came up to London on Sunday morning,
apparently you did not go to your house in Brondesbury. We’ve
ascertained that you only went there on Monday. Where were you on
Sunday night? If you can tell us that, and bring witnesses to prove
the truth of it, it will materially help you.”

He was, of course, thinking of the incident of the walking-stick.
Already he was more than half satisfied with the Jew’s story—it fitted
in with his own deductions. But he wanted to make quite sure. For this
would help him still more.

“No—we didn’t go home,” said Moss, “we were not expected—our two maids
at Brondesbury had the week-end off. We went to an hotel and stayed
the Sunday night there.”

“What hotel?”

“The ‘Chester.’”

“Will you come with us to the ‘Chester’ now?” asked the
superintendent. “We should like to corroborate this statement.”

“Certainly—I will come.”

“Go down and get a taxi,” said the superintendent to Colson, “and ask
Tyler to come with us.”

The Jew was putting on his overcoat as Colson left the room; he turned
a nervous, inquiring glance on the superintendent.

“Tyler is one of our men,” said the latter dryly. “He’s been shadowing
you since Monday. I hope,” he added, in a more kindly tone, “to take
him back with us to Frattenbury.”

Arrived at the “Chester,” the superintendent produced his card and
asked to see the manager. A few minutes later they were closeted with
him in his private office.

“I want you to tell us,” said the superintendent, “whether this
gentleman,” and he indicated Moss, “stayed here on Sunday night last.”

“The name?”

“Moss—Isaac Moss.”

“Certainly. Wait here a moment, and I’ll make inquiries.”

“I should like to have everything corroborated.”

“All right.”

The manager returned after a brief interval, bringing with him the
booking clerk, the hall porter and a chambermaid. The booking clerk at
once recognised Moss, produced his registration signature, and the
entry in the book. The chambermaid stated that he and his wife had
occupied room number 87.

“Can any of you swear—I warn you that it may have to come to that—that
Mr. Moss was in the hotel all Sunday night?”

“Up to twelve o’clock would be enough,” broke in Colson.

“I can do that,” said the hall porter; “at least I know he was here
from nine p.m. till midnight. He sat in the lounge most of the time. I
saw him writing a letter, which he gave me to post just before he went
to bed—a minute or two after twelve. I saw him get into the lift, and
said good night to him. I’m quite prepared to swear to this.”

“Very well,” said the superintendent, “that’s all I want to know. Can
we be alone—my friends and I—for a minute or two?” he asked the
manager.

“Certainly. Make use of this room. Nothing wrong, I hope,
superintendent?”

“No—it’s all right.”

When the manager and the others had gone, the superintendent said:

“Well, Mr. Moss, I’ve decided not to take you into custody, though I
may as well tell you now that I quite intended to do so. You’ve been
exceedingly imprudent, and you’ve had a narrow escape. As to these
diamonds”—he had put them back in the bag and pocketed them—“can you
satisfy me that you have a right to them?”

“I have all the correspondence relating to them in my office—and I can
bring another proof. Ehbrenstein & Co. sent full particulars of the
transaction to another of their London agents—this is frequently done,
as a covering precaution.”

“Very good, we will return to your office and see this agent. If it is
as you say, I am prepared to leave the stones with you.”

“How about—how about the other stone—you found it on Mr. Templeton, I
hope?”

The man’s Jewish instincts were predominating now that the crisis was
over.

“You’ll get that—in good time. Now, Mr. Moss, I don’t want to have any
further trouble with you. If all is as you say, and I allow you your
freedom, you must be prepared to tell your story to the jury at the
remanded inquest. You understand?”

“Do you think,” hesitated Moss, a little of his terror returning,
“that they’d be likely to return a verdict of—of—murder against me?”

“It doesn’t matter in the least what they do,” said the policeman with
fine sarcasm in his opinion of the brain powers of the “twelve good
men and true.” “It’s only a coroner’s jury. We might have, in that
case, for form’s sake, to bring you before the magistrates’ court. But
you’d never get committed for trial. _We’ll_ see to that.”

The end of it was that the superintendent expressed himself satisfied,
released Isaac Moss, and returned to Frattenbury with Colson. In the
course of the journey the detective remarked:

“I never expected we should find Moss to be our man. When I showed his
housekeeper and her husband that stick this morning, pretending I had
found it in their master’s boat, and they both denied that they had
ever seen it before, I felt pretty certain. Besides, I thought
beforehand that the stick was too long to be used by a little man like
Moss. Well, that settles _his_ book,” and he rubbed his hands. “We’ve
eliminated _two_ out of the three. Now we’ll go for the last one. A
cigar merchant, eh, sir? That’s a bit significant.”

The superintendent nodded.

“What are you going to do, Colson?”

“Leave that to me for a bit, sir. I’ve got a card up my sleeve that
ought to take the trick. And I’ll play it—before the adjourned
inquest!”

Smoking his pipe that evening, in his snug little home, he related the
events of the day to his wife.

“And now for Mr. Joseph Proctor, retired cigar merchant!” he exclaimed
gleefully.

She took his hand as she sat beside him.

“Be careful dear!” she said.

“Why?”

“You’ve just told me that Mr. Moss is a little man, and would scarcely
have carried a long walking-stick.”

“Well?”

“Isn’t Mr. Proctor a little man, too?”

“Confound it!” he exclaimed.

Then his face lightened. “It’s all right,” he said. “If he bought the
stick in Switzerland he’d have to take what they’d got. And he
wouldn’t use it in the ordinary way there—in climbing with it.
Besides——”

“Besides what?”

“There’s more ways than one of carrying a walking-stick, my dear. I’ve
observed that. Little men often simply _carry_ them—I mean, they don’t
hold them by the handle and stick the point in the ground when they
walk.”

She squeezed his hand fondly.

“You are a silly old dear,” she said with a laugh. “That reasoning
might have applied to Mr. Moss, you know.”

“One for you,” he replied. “Never mind, old girl, Moss is out of the
game now.”



CHAPTER XIV

Reginald Templeton’s Letter

Anthony Crosby looked up with a smile as Winnie Cotterill was ushered
into his private office.

“Good morning, Miss Cotterill. Very glad to see you,” he said, getting
up from his chair and shaking hands with the girl. “You got my note,
then?”

“You said you wanted to see me, Mr. Crosby.”

“I did. Sit down, won’t you? Now I dare say you’ve been wondering why
I’ve enticed you into my office, eh?”

“Is it anything about Mr. Templeton’s murder?” asked Winnie as she sat
down.

“Well—er—in a way it is.”

“Have the police found out yet who did it?” asked the girl eagerly.

The lawyer took up some typewritten sheets lying on his table and
glanced at them.

“The superintendent at Frattenbury has been good enough to send me a
private report,” he replied. “I don’t think I’m betraying their
confidence when I tell you that so far they haven’t laid their hands
on the villain. There was another man they suspected—besides Mr.
Grayson—but he seems to have cleared himself.”

Winnie had taken off her gloves. The observant lawyer glanced at her
left hand.

“You’re very glad Mr. Grayson is no longer suspected?” he asked dryly.

The girl blushed a little, smiled and nodded.

“Yes,” she said. “You see—since I saw you last——”

“You’ve added to your jewellery, eh, Miss Cotterill?”

“Mr. Grayson asked me to marry him, and I said——”

“‘Yes.’ I’m not surprised. Let me offer you my congratulations. When
are you going to be married?”

“Oh, it’ll be ever so long a time. You see, Harold’s got to make his
way as an artist. He’s the youngest son. He’s getting on, of course.
But we shall have to wait a bit.”

“And you—do you manage to earn your own living?”

“Oh, yes—just, you know. I haven’t been able to save anything. But I’m
getting along nicely.”

“I see. Well, Miss Cotterill, we’ll dismiss this naturally pleasant
subject for a time, if you don’t mind. I’ll tell you why I asked you
to call. I suppose you know that my late client was much interested in
you?”

“Uncle?—Mr. Templeton? He was most awfully good to me.”

“I wonder if you know why?” said the lawyer.

“Sometimes I’ve often tried to guess—I’ve wondered if he was fond of
my mother, you know?”

Crosby nodded. “Yes—he was, Miss Cotterill. He was in love with her
before she married.”

A deep blush spread over the girl’s face.

“You haven’t sent for me to tell me he—he was my fa——”

“No, no, no, my dear young lady. I assure you. Besides, you probably
remember your father?”

And he looked at her keenly.

“Yes—very faintly. You see, I was very young when he died—I couldn’t
have been more than four years old. I can just remember him—not what
he was like, you know. That’s all. I asked because—because my mother
hardly ever mentioned him—she didn’t seem to care to talk about
him—and I wondered——”

“Yes, yes,” interposed the lawyer sympathetically. “I understand.
Well, you can dismiss any such thought from your mind.”

“Can you tell me anything about my father?”

He looked at her a moment, and then said:

“No, I can’t tell you anything about him. But I can tell you something
that ought to please you,” he went on with a smile. “Mr. Templeton
made his will, and left it with me before he went to South Africa.
Here it is,” and he held up a paper. “Can you guess the contents?”

“How can I, Mr. Crosby?”

“Well, he’s left everything of which he died possessed to you!”

“To _me_!” she exclaimed, in astonishment. “Oh, no—there must be some
mistake.”

He laughed.

“It’s very rude of you to doubt a lawyer’s word, my dear young lady.
And you ought not to be surprised. His only relations, apparently,
were the Fittleworths, and they’re quite well off. Now, don’t jump to
conclusions. You’re not going to be an heiress by any means, so don’t
you think it. Mr. Templeton wasn’t at all rich, and he spent most of
his money in travelling and fitting out expeditions. I’ve been looking
over his affairs, and you’ll only get two thousand pounds at the
outside.”

“Two thousand pounds!” cried Winnie. “I never expected to have so much
money in all my life. Do you really mean it?”

“I wish everyone was as modest in their ideas of money as you are. No
I don’t, though—I should have to lower my fees! Yes, it’s about two
thousand, as far as I can make out. Now, what are you going to do with
it?”

He leaned back in his chair and smiled at her. Visions of gowns, hats,
jewellery, furniture, and finally a trousseau flitted through the
girl’s mind. And the lawyer, who had a knowledge of human
nature—intensified by being a married man—shrewdly guessed several of
the visions.

“I—don’t—know,” said Winnie slowly. “There are ever so many things,
and——”

“Now look here, Miss Cotterill,” broke in Crosby, “may I presume to
give you a bit of advice? If you invest the money carefully, it ought
to bring you in a hundred a year.”

He knew what the answer would be. And it was.

“Oh, Mr. Crosby, can’t I have _some_ of it to spend now?”

“You can have the whole lot if you like—when we’ve taken out probate.
It’s yours absolutely.”

“I shouldn’t want to spend it _all_. I shouldn’t know how to.”

“Oh, I expect you would. Anyhow—I don’t want to force myself on
you—but will you let me arrange matters? Suppose you have a hundred
pounds and let me invest the remainder for you, eh?”

Her eyes sparkled.

“That would be just ripping!” she said. “Thank you ever so much.”

“Very well. I’ll see about taking out probate, and let you know when I
shall want you again.”

He had adopted his professional manner and looked at his watch
markedly.

“There isn’t anything else just now. Good-bye, Miss Cotterill; and
hearty congratulations—in a double sense.”

When Winnie Cotterill had departed, the lawyer took up another paper
that was lying on his desk, and read it carefully. The sealed packet
he had mentioned to Canon Fittleworth had contained it. It was in the
form of a letter from Reginald Templeton.

  My Dear Crosby,

  We are all of us in the lap of the gods, and sometimes they drop us
  before we think they will. Anyhow, when a man starts, as I am
  starting, for some considerable time abroad, one never knows what
  may happen. So this is for your private eye in case I cut the traces
  or they are cut for me—and don’t see you again.

  You have my will, in which I leave the little I’ve got to Winnie
  Cotterill—and I expect you know the reason. But there’s something
  else I want to tell you about the girl, which I think you ought to
  know in case the unforeseen may happen—as it does sometimes. Her
  name isn’t really Cotterill at all—it’s Forbes. Don’t start, my
  friend, there’s nothing wrong with her parentage. The facts are
  these. Her mother, Mabel Cotterill, didn’t marry me as I hoped she
  would. She chose a man named Percy Forbes, a young lawyer. He turned
  out a wrong ’un. When Winifred was about four years old, he was
  tried on a serious charge of embezzlement, and sentenced to seven
  years’ penal servitude. He hadn’t got a leg to stand upon, it was a
  clear case. He and his wife were living at the time—well, it doesn’t
  matter where. But Mrs. Forbes naturally left the neighbourhood; in
  fact I advised her to do so. The question arose about Winifred. The
  mother didn’t want the child to hear of the family disgrace, so she
  went to a neighbourhood where nobody knew her, and took her maiden
  name of Cotterill. We used to talk over matters sometimes—as to what
  would happen when Forbes came out of prison—and she hated the
  thought of the child ever knowing that her father had been a
  convict. But Forbes didn’t come out of prison—he died at Princetown
  in the third year of his sentence. So Winifred was brought up to
  believe that he died when she was four years old—and that’s all she
  knows. And her mother stuck to the name of Cotterill.

  What do I want you to do? Probably nothing, my friend. I trust you
  to keep up the fiction. A name doesn’t matter, and the girl will, I
  hope, marry some good fellow, and so get another name that she’s a
  right to. You will agree that it is best not to let her have the
  burden of her father’s disgrace.

  _But_—and this is the real object of this letter—if ever there’s a
  question of her benefiting by the knowledge (I don’t suppose there
  ever will be), I wanted you to know the facts. It seemed to me to be
  only fair to her. And, in that case, I ask you to use _your own
  discretion_—just as I should have done. You’re a wiser man than I am
  but even I could solve the problem as to whether it would be better
  for the girl to know of her father’s crime for the sake of any
  material advantage that might occur, or whether a mind based on the
  contentment of ignorance is not really worth more than worldly
  dross.

  I know I’m a queer chap, and it’s because I’m queer that I haven’t
  mentioned places. You’re shrewd enough to find out the facts for
  yourself if occasion arises. And as the finding out of the facts
  would take you a little time, I’ve tied you up, so that you can have
  plenty of leisure for decision.

  That’s all. If the aforementioned gods drop me, you’ll see that
  Winifred gets my little lot of possessions. And to recompense you
  for this—and for making further investigations if you have to do
  so—please take the enclosed bank-note for a hundred pounds, with
  every good wish from

        Your sincere friend,
          Reginald Templeton.

The lawyer carefully replaced this document in its envelope and locked
it up.

“A queer letter,” he said to himself; “but then, Templeton was not an
ordinary sort of man. Of course, I can easily find out about this
fellow Forbes, if I want to, but it seems to me, at present, that
there’s nothing to do—yes, it wouldn’t be fair to tell the girl. I can
quite understand the policy of bringing her up in ignorance of her
father’s crime.

“Well, anyway,” he went on, “this matter has nothing to do with the
murder.”

He took up the superintendent’s letter and read it again.

“So Moss is out of the running,” he soliloquised, “and the diamonds
are accounted for. So it could hardly be robbery—unless,” and he went
on thoughtfully, “unless, of course, someone else knew he had those
diamonds on him—and did not know he had handed them over to Moss. That
looks feasible. It’s a rational motive for the crime. I wonder who
this other suspect is that the police say they have an eye on?

“There’s another queer thing about this murder,” he reflected. “Hardly
any papers were found in the cabin, and none on Templeton’s body. Yet
there were about thirty pounds in notes in the open locker. If the
murderer was after the diamonds, and didn’t find them, why did he take
any papers? For Templeton must have had a pocket-book or something on
him. It’s a rum case. I wonder if the police will ever solve it. Well,
perhaps there will be some fresh light at the inquest. Anyhow, I can’t
give any more time to it just now.”

It wasn’t long before Winnie Cotterill saw Grayson. He called at the
flat and had tea. Maude Wingrave came in just after he had arrived.

Winnie told them the news.

“Poor Uncle!” she said; “I’d rather not have had the money when it
means his death, of course. But I just can’t help being excited. Look
here, you children! You’ve both got to dine with me to-night—at the
‘Petit Cygne.’ I’ll stand treat.”

“Squanderer!” derided Maude. “Beware, Mr. Grayson! She’ll throw your
money about like ducks and drakes. I don’t think I’ll come, Winnie.”

“Why not, old thing?”

“You two irresponsible young persons having entered upon the broad
downward path that leadeth into the narrow straights of matrimony with
insufficient income will do all the talking to one another—and it will
be appalling to listen unto. That’s why.”

“I’ll promise to address quite a lot of remarks to you,” said Grayson.

“Yes, I know—‘Don’t you think Winnie looks charming to-night?’ and all
that sort of unbearable——”

“Shut up, Maude—don’t be rude. Please excuse her, Harold. I’m trying
to teach her manners—she spent the extra tuppence on frivolity. You’ll
both come, and there’s an end of it.”

“The end of it will be that I shall leave you two children at the
close of the meal, see?”

“_We_ don’t mind, do we, Harold?”

“Not a bit,” replied Grayson, as if he meant it.

“You’re not polite, Mr. Grayson,” said Maude. “If you don’t treat me
with due respect, I shall stay till the bitter end.”

But, being a good-hearted girl, of course she didn’t.



CHAPTER XV

Detective-Sergeant Colson’s Deductions

The newspaper paragraphs about the murder at Marsh Quay dwindled in
length. There were several scathing leading articles dealing with the
inefficiency of the local police, and expounding the systems that
ought to be put into force. One leader-writer produced an article
conclusively proving that the Government was to blame. Writers of that
peculiar terse and asterisked matter—the editor, it is presumed, puts
in the asterisks in exchange for the copy he deletes—which adorns the
“magazine” page of certain of our morning papers reaped a small crop
of guineas. Thus one of them described the manufacture of cigar bands
another epitomised half a dozen yacht tragedies, and a third gave a
graphic sketch of how he himself had sailed in the Marsh Quay estuary.

The Sunday papers, of course, had their contributions. “An Expert in
Crime” brilliantly reconstructed the whole murder, hinted at clues
which the police ought to have found, and, without mentioning any
names, left the impression on the mind of the reader that the two
sailor-men, to wit, Jim Webb and Tom Gale, had acted in collusion,
with the assistance of Mrs. Yates, who had countenanced a mysterious
rendezvous at the “Mariner’s Arms.”

The police were inundated with letters—suggestive and critical. People
called at the police station to make statements, which were patiently
received and laid on one side. But, as usual, the police quietly kept
their own counsel and were unimpressed.

Colson, who was now in the best of spirits, called on Canon
Fittleworth.

“I’m sorry,” said the Canon, “but my list isn’t quite complete yet. I
shall have to make a few more efforts of memory, as Major Renshaw puts
it. I’m not satisfied.”

“What list, sir?”

“Why, the names of all the people I can remember who smoked any of my
cigars.”

“Oh, _that_!” exclaimed the detective. “Yes, I know. But it wasn’t
about that list that I called—later on will do very well. I came to
ask you for the name and address of your friend in Cuba who sent you
the cigars.”

“My Spanish friend. Certainly. I’ll write it down for you. What do you
want it for?” he asked, as he passed it over to Colson.

“Oh—it may be useful,” said the detective in a non-committal manner.
“One never knows.”

“Any further progress?”

The Canon, of course, was interested.

“You mustn’t ask me, please, sir. We’re doing all we can.”

Later on that day the police sent a cablegram to Cuba, asking for
certain information. Also, Colson ran up to London, and was closeted
for some time with the managing director of a reputable firm of
wholesale cigar importers, from whom he gathered certain details which
he carefully entered in his notebook.

“They’re first-rate cigars, aren’t they?” asked the managing director
at the close of the interview. “Of course, there are very few of them
manufactured. We keep them to ourselves.”

“I don’t know anything about them in that way,” replied the detective
dryly. “I haven’t smoked one.”

“Haven’t you? Well, you shall then. I’ve got some of them here. Take
half a dozen. Anything else I can do for you, let me know. So you know
Proctor, eh? Nice little chap. Asked me to run down and see him some
day.”

“I’d rather you said nothing about my visit, if you do, sir. You will
understand I’ve been asking you for this information in confidence.”

“Quite. I won’t say a word. Not that I’m likely to see him yet
awhile.”

The detective agreed that the brand was an excellent one as he smoked
one of the cigars on his return journey. He also read, in the evening
paper, one of the aforenamed articles on the lethargy of the
provincial police—and enjoyed it immensely. But, then, he was in the
mood for enjoying anything just then.

“By the way, Colson,” said the superintendent to him when they were in
consultation that evening, “have you made any more progress with that
blotting-paper puzzle, ‘Ezra’s ices’?”

“Not much, sir. I think I’ve found out two or three more words. But I
don’t attach importance to it. We’ve something more definite than that
to go upon.”

“True—but I’d bear it in mind all the same. We mustn’t neglect any
detail.”

“All right, sir. I’m feeling a little bit off colour,” he went on,
with a grin. “I think a little fresh air will do me good. So I propose
taking a day’s holiday to-morrow and spending it at Marsh Quay. I may
even stay the night, sir.”

“Very well, Colson,” replied the superintendent, grinning at him in
return. “I hope it will set you up. Don’t get into mischief.”

“I may commit a burglary, sir—that’s all. It’s a fascinating game when
you’re on a holiday. If possible—if I get any luck, that is—it won’t
come off. But I’ll come back and give myself up to you if it does.”

Colson seemed about to carry out his threat next day by taking with
him a jimmy, a strong pocket-knife, and a bunch of skeleton
keys—carefully selected from trophies at the police station.

The house in which Proctor resided at Marsh Quay was exactly opposite
the spot where the yacht had been anchored. The main entrance was from
the road, just before the quay was reached. A low stone wall, running
parallel with the estuary, bordered the garden on the western side,
and a small gate led through this wall to the shore; in fact Proctor
had come out of this gate when he had accosted Jim Webb and Mrs. Yates
on the morning when the murder was discovered.

The _Firefly_ was no longer riding in the little harbour. Acting on
the instructions of her owner, Jim Webb by this time was sailing her
back to Salcombe. Local interest in the scene of the murder had
subsided, and the detective had the place practically to himself.

He had found out all that he could about Mr. Proctor’s household and
habits. That was not very difficult. The unsuspecting landlady of the
“Mariner’s Arms,” in the course of an apparently casual conversation,
had told him that the boy Philip had left, and that his great-uncle
was once more by himself. He also gathered that Proctor’s domestic
establishment consisted of an elderly cook-housekeeper and a young
maidservant, both of whom slept at the back of the house, while
Proctor himself occupied a bedroom over the dining-room with a view,
south and west, of the estuary.

He further ascertained that it was the little man’s usual habit, when
alone, to walk into Frattenbury in the afternoon, where he read the
papers at a club.

It was the afternoon now, and he had seen Proctor start towards
Frattenbury across the field path, so he felt free and unobserved.
There were several things that he wanted to do. First of all he wanted
to saturate his mind with a mental vision of the committal of the
crime. It was not the first time, of course, that he had taken a
careful survey, but he wished to reconstruct the scene, as he had
imagined it, more closely.

For this purpose he took up a position on the shore just by the little
garden gate. Then he soliloquised:

“Yes—now suppose anyone in the house, or garden, were on the lookout
for Templeton’s return—Wait a bit, though. Something might have
happened before then. It was, probably, only the thought of robbery in
the first place.

“By Jove!” he exclaimed presently, “I believe I’ve got it—it would
account for the stick in the dinghy and everything else. This way.

“Let us call the murderer A. Well, A has reason to believe that
Templeton has those diamonds, and he doesn’t know that he has
already given them to Moss. He has seen Jim Webb go off to
Frattenbury—probably found out that he was staying the night there.
And he has seen Templeton go, too. He could easily find out if he was
expected back late or not. Tom Gale knew it, Grayson knew it, Jim Webb
knew it—they talked it over in the inn. And Mrs. Yates knew it—she
told me she’d remarked about it to others.

“Well, then, A, with this information, speculates that Templeton might
leave the diamonds on board. Quite likely. It was a dark night and a
lonely walk. He determines to take a chance on this. But he can’t do
it till the coast is quite clear. That wouldn’t be till after closing
time—ten o’clock. He waits about outside, probably in the garden,
taking his stick with him. He may have armed himself with a knife—ah!
that’s it, he took a tool of some sort—very likely an old dagger, as
the doctor pointed out, to prise open any locks. Capital!

“What next? As he stood there waiting, he lighted a cigar—being an
inveterate smoker—from force of habit. He would hear the men come out
of the inn at ten o’clock; he would hear Tom Gale walk off along the
quay, and then all would be quiet, with a clear coast.

“He goes down to the shore now. The dinghy is afloat. It’s much more
simple to use her for his purpose than to run a canoe down to the
water—and less noisy. He gets into the dinghy, laying his
walking-stick down in the stern—a natural action, because the seat for
the rower is well aft—pulls out to the yacht, gets on board and makes
the dinghy fast.

“Then he lights the lamp. That’s all right, because anyone seeing it
would naturally conclude the owner is aboard. People knew he was
sleeping there that night. And he begins to make his search.

“But Templeton comes back sooner than A expected. A man doesn’t
generally leave a house where he’s dining so early. But we know
Templeton did. He sees the light on board, finds the dinghy has gone,
and wonders what is up. Possibly he jumps to the conclusion that Jim
Webb has come back after all. A canoe is lying there handy; he runs
her down to the water and paddles aboard.

“Meanwhile A, still smoking his cigar from force of habit, has burnt
it down to the band; he flicks it off, or it drops off by itself. Then
he hears Templeton coming aboard. He is caught in the act.

“He has the tool or dagger, whatever it is, in his hand. Possibly his
first impulse is to hide—behind the table. But Templeton comes into
the cabin, and, for the moment, hesitates in astonishment. The folding
table is between them—that prevents a struggle. And then the climax
comes. A, either desperate at being discovered or acting on a
murderous instinct for the sake of the jewels—he hadn’t found them,
and both lockers were open, as we know—probably the former, reaches
over the table and aims a blow at the unlucky Templeton—a blow which
proves fatal.

“Then he probably pauses to think—he may even take a look outside, or
listen to hear if anyone is about. He knows he’s risked his neck for
the sake of those diamonds. He’s a cool hand and calculates there’s no
_greater_ risk—now the deed is done. So he takes out of Templeton’s
pockets his wallet—anything he can find—he isn’t going to examine them
at the moment—he knows he must clear out as quickly as possible. He
puts his hand under the body and feels the waistcoat pockets—they are
quite flat, so he doesn’t bother about them, little knowing that he
misses the only stone there is.

“His next move is to get back. Not the dinghy—the canoe, of course.
The dinghy might arouse suspicion if found on the shore in the morning
with the canoe fast to the yacht. In his haste and trepidation, he
forgets the stick he has left in the dinghy till afterwards. Probably
he is indoors by this time. He daren’t return that night. It’s too big
a risk. And he daren’t remove the stick the next day; people are about
from the beginning. His only chance to recover that stick is to do
exactly what he did do—on Sunday night. There! What do you think of
that?”

He addressed the remark out loud to a solemn-looking rook that had
perched for a moment on a post opposite to him.

And the rook flapped its wings and replied:

“Caw! Caw!”

And then flew away as if it was not a bit impressed—which it ought to
have been. For Detective-Sergeant Colson’s reasoning was so very clear
and lucid that he felt it was going to hang a man and give him
promotion.

Colson, unabashed, by the irresponsive and somewhat impertinent rook,
went on with his construction methods.

“When A had examined the contents of Templeton’s pockets,” and he
chuckled, “he was a little disappointed, I fear. Of course, he burnt
the lot. We shall never find them, but we _shall_ find A!”

Having arrived at this conclusion, to his great satisfaction, Colson
turned his thoughts to the other object for which he had visited Marsh
Quay that day. He wanted to get, somehow, into Proctor’s house, and
that without anyone knowing about it. He was quite prepared, if
occasion brought the necessity, to make a burglarious entry that
night, for which purpose he was minded to reconnoitre and view
possible means of entrance. There was another method of course. He
could ring the front-door bell, boldly ask to see Proctor, and,
finding that he was out, beg to be allowed to remain until he
returned. The only hindrance to this procedure was that he would
arouse Proctor’s suspicions, which he was not anxious to do. There was
a third way out of it, but rather risky. If he could satisfy himself
that the two domestics were out of hearing in the kitchen at the back
of the house, he might be able to slip in now—and try to find out what
he wanted to know.

The way in which he really did enter the house was entirely unforeseen
by him. He went into the garden, through the little green gate, and
was beginning carefully to observe how the windows of the dining-room
opened, when, out of the front door, cigar in mouth, walked Mr.
Proctor himself. Afterwards he ascertained that Proctor had, after
walking half-way to Frattenbury, turned back and let himself in at a
door behind the house. The nondescript-looking man who carried a
fishing-rod, but whose sport seemed to fail just at the time that
Proctor started for Frattenbury, told him this hours later. At present
he made an effort to conceal his surprise and mentally said, “Damn!”

“Hallo, Mr. Colson,” said Proctor cheerily, “still trying to find out
about that nasty business, I suppose! You were coming to see me?”

The detective had no resource but to reply in the affirmative. This he
did in a perfectly natural manner.

“Well, come along in, then,” said the little man; “it’s a bit chilly
outside to-day.”

He led the way to his bachelor dining-room, and gave the detective a
chair. The latter had quite recovered his composure; in fact,
outwardly, he had not shown that he had lost it.

“Just two or three things I should like to ask you, Mr. Proctor. I
know you’re on the jury, of course, but I won’t interfere with your
prerogatives. I rather wish you’d have been summoned as a witness
instead.”

“That was the fault of the police,” said Proctor, shrugging his
shoulders. “Now, what can I tell you? Stop. Have a cigar first. I can
offer you a really good smoke.”

“Cheek,” thought Colson.

Proctor went to a cupboard by the side of the fire-place, took a bunch
of keys from his pocket and unlocked it. On a shelf were more than a
dozen boxes of cigars. Colson eyed them eagerly, but was too far off
to see them closely, and too wise to give himself away by moving.

The little man carefully selected a box, shut the cupboard and locked
it, put the box in front of Colson on the table and said:

“I think you’ll like these. Now, then, Mr. Colson?”

The detective had taken out his pocket-book and was apparently
consulting it closely. In reality he was inventing questions.

“We’re not at all satisfied, sir,” he said. “You’ve got a good view of
the estuary. You didn’t notice any other strange craft besides the
_Firefly_ about at the time the murder took place?”

“No, I didn’t.”

“It’s as well to be certain. I suppose a small boat _could_ have got
up from lower down the estuary that night?”

“Yes—certainly. The tide was flowing, you know.”

“And she could have got back?”

“There was no wind. It would have been hard rowing—unless whoever he
was waited till the tide turned.”

The detective asked several more questions and spoilt three or four
pages of his notebook by writing down replies. Then the little man
said:

“I’m just going to have tea. Won’t you have some.”

“Oh, thank you very much, if it’s not troubling you.”

“Not at all—if you don’t mind excusing me for a few minutes. I’ve a
letter to write—in my den. I want to catch the only outgoing post we
have.”

“Oh, certainly, sir.”

“What a stroke of luck!” exclaimed the detective when Proctor had left
the room. “I should hardly have believed it; but, of course, he
doesn’t know. He’s out of his reckoning—thinks because that band was
changed that we don’t suspect anything.”

For a minute Colson sat still, smoking his cigar. Then, with a careful
look around, he crossed on tiptoe to the cupboard, took his skeleton
keys from his pocket, cautiously inserted first one, then another in
the keyhole and opened it.

Swiftly he ran his eye over the array of boxes. Removing a pile in
front, his face beamed as he caught sight of an unfastened box in the
back tier. He recognised the label. Quickly he opened it, took out a
cigar and looked at the band.

“It’s the one!” he murmured.

He dropped the cigar in his pocket, closed and locked the cupboard,
resumed his seat, and was innocently reading a newspaper he had picked
off the table, when Proctor returned, followed by his maid bringing in
the tea.

“Sorry to keep you waiting,” said the little man genially. “Do you
take sugar, Mr. Colson?”

They chatted on various topics, and when the detective rose to go,
Proctor accompanied him to the door.

“Thank you very much, Mr. Proctor.”

“Not at all. Only too glad to have been of any use to you. See you
to-morrow at the adjourned inquest, I suppose?”

“Yes,” said Colson, “we shall meet at the inquest. Good afternoon,
sir.”

There was nothing further to detain him at Marsh Quay, so he went back
to Frattenbury and had a long conversation with the superintendent.

“Excellent,” said the latter, ticking off items on his fingers as he
spoke. “The same brand of cigar, and the cablegram from Cuba tells us
they have sent him these from time to time, and the firm in London
corroborate it.”

“And he’s been in Switzerland,” added Colson.

“And he’s been in Switzerland,” echoed the superintendent. “It’s quite
enough to go upon. I’ll make out the deposition, and then—after the
inquest.”

“After the inquest,” the detective said with a chuckle. “I wonder what
sort of a verdict the foreman will persuade the jury to return!”

“Wilful murder—against some person unknown,” replied the
superintendent sardonically.

“But it won’t be a true verdict,” said Colson with decision.



CHAPTER XVI

Mr. Proctor Upsets Matters

The coroner, in re-opening the inquiry, intimated that only one
witness of any importance would be heard, and that, with the full
consent of the police, who would not, he understood, ask for a further
adjournment, the jury would be called upon to record their verdict
that afternoon.

The first witness called was a postman who gave evidence that he had
seen the deceased coming out of the Cathedral precincts at Frattenbury
between half-past eight and nine on the Saturday evening. He, the
witness, was standing outside the post office, opposite the gateway
into the Close, where there was an electric lamp.

“Why did you not tell us this at the commencement of the inquiry?”
asked the coroner.

“Because it was only through a portrait of the deceased, published in
a newspaper afterwards, that I remembered his face, sir.”

“Very well. Did you see which way he went when he came out of the
Close?”

“Up the street, towards the Cross, sir.”

“That was all you noticed?”

“Yes, sir, nothing more.”

“Thank you.”

Isaac Moss was called next. He was terribly nervous, and gave his
evidence in such a low tone of voice that the coroner had frequently
to ask him to speak up. Bit by bit the story he had told the
superintendent and Colson was painfully dragged from him. The jury
listened attentively, and evidently one or two of them were not much
struck with his veracity. The coroner then questioned him.

“Why didn’t you inform the police at the time?”

“I was too much frightened.”

“You know that you put yourself in a very serious position, Mr. Moss?”

“Yes, I know that. I regret it very much now.”

“You say that it was after half-past twelve when you crossed the
estuary?”

“It was; it struck one just after I had left the yacht.”

“Have you anyone who can corroborate your statement that you had not
left your house before?”

“My wife is here, and my housekeeper, who brought in some hot water
for my whisky just before eleven o’clock.”

“We will hear them—for your sake,” said the coroner. “But in any case,
it is my duty to reprimand you seriously for your foolish behaviour.”

Mrs. Moss and the housekeeper having given brief evidence, a juror
said:

“May I ask you a question, sir?”

The coroner nodded.

“Isn’t it a fact that the doctor who examined the body told us last
time that the murder _might_ have been committed after midnight?”

“That is so,” replied the coroner, looking round. “The doctor is here.
Would you like him to repeat his statement?”

“If you please, sir.”

And the doctor said:

“Yes. I certainly stated that the murder might have been committed
after twelve, but not long after. The probability is that it took
place before that hour. Rigor mortis was palpably developed.”

“Thank you,” said the coroner. “Are there any more witnesses?”

There was only Joe Thatcher, who gave brief evidence as to seeing Moss
board the yacht, and gave no little amusement at his indignantly
assumed innocence when questioned as to his doings that night. The
police were careful to state that he had come forward voluntarily.

The coroner summed up briefly, not too greatly in favour of Moss, and
directed the jury to find their verdict.

“Do you wish to retire, gentlemen?”

“Yes, sir,” said the juryman who had spoken before.

The jury went into another room, and there was a little buzz of
conversation. The coroner did not join in it. He was absorbed in his
notes. Anthony Crosby, who was seated next to the Chief Constable,
said to the latter:

“I should like to call at the police station for a short conversation.
There’s something I want to see.”

“You shall,” said the Chief Constable. “I’ll motor you back in my car.
Norton and Colson are coming in the other. We shall probably have some
interesting information to give you by that time,” he went on grimly.
“There are going to be developments.”

“Really?”

Major Renshaw nodded.

“You’ll see,” he said. “I hope the jury won’t be long—though it really
doesn’t matter what verdict they bring in. I say—you won’t mind
waiting a few minutes before we start back?”

“Oh, dear, no.”

But the jury still remained out of the room. Presently a note was
handed in and given to the coroner, who opened it, read it and then
said:

“The jury wish to know whether the police are satisfied with the
evidence of Mr. Moss.”

He glanced at Moss as he spoke. The Jew’s face paled. The
superintendent whispered a word or two to him, and the Chief Constable
said to the coroner:

“You may tell the jury, sir, that we are perfectly satisfied. We have
nothing to bring against Mr. Moss.”

Moss gave a sigh of relief, and the coroner scribbled a note to the
jury. In about ten minutes’ time that body filed in, one or two of
them looking very heated.

The coroner addressed the foreman.

“Are you all agreed on your verdict?”

“We are, sir.”

“And it is?”

“Wilful murder against some person or persons unknown.”

“Very well. I agree with your finding. The inquiry is closed.”

After a few brief formalities the assembly broke up. Major Renshaw,
the superintendent and Colson detached themselves from the rest and
went outside the inn. Presently Proctor came out and was walking
across to his house opposite, when the Chief Constable spoke to him.

“We have a matter of business with you that is best discussed in
private, Mr. Proctor. May we come over to your house?”

He looked at the three men steadily, smiled slightly and said:

“By all means, Major. Come along.” As they walked across he said to
them, in quite a matter-of-fact way: “I had quite a little trouble
with that jury. Two or three of them were bent on returning a verdict
against the unfortunate Moss. Of course, he didn’t do it, but it
wasn’t till we had the note from the coroner that they fell in with
the rest.”

“No—he didn’t do it,” said the Major dryly.

The little man was opening his front door. He gave the Chief Constable
a quick glance, pursed up his mouth and smiled. He led the way into
the dining-room. The three policemen were silent. Then Major Renshaw
addressed him, his face very grave.

“Mr. Proctor, I fear I have a most unpleasant du——”

“I know exactly what you’re going to do,” broke in the little man
before the other could go on. “You’re going to arrest me for the
murder of Reginald Templeton, and then warn me that anything I say may
be used as evidence against me. Isn’t that so?”

For a moment or two Major Renshaw was silent with astonishment. The
superintendent gave a low whistle. Colson exclaimed:

“Great Scott!”

The Chief Constable recovered himself.

“You are right, Mr. Proctor,” he said sternly. “Take care what you
say, sir!” For Proctor was again about to speak, and he did speak, in
spite of the warning.

“One minute, Major—I beg of you, one minute. Oh, you may make use of
anything I say, and welcome. But it’s for your own sake. I’ve a strong
respect for the police. I knew you were going to arrest me. I expected
it before this.”

“You are only doing yourself harm, sir!” thundered the Chief Constable
in his best military style. “I warn you.”

“And I warn you, Major,” said the imperturbable little man, pointing
at the Chief Constable, “if you once formally arrest me, I shall
remain silent until I’m before the magistrates. And then you and your
police will be a laughing-stock. And I shan’t even have to employ a
lawyer. It’s true, Major.”

The astonished Chief Constable hesitated. He turned to the
superintendent, but the latter only shook his head in bewilderment.
Colson was hard at work biting his finger-nails. It was an
unprecedented scene.

“What do you mean, sir?” asked the Chief Constable, hesitating a
little.

“This, Major. I’ll go with you to Frattenbury with pleasure, and you
can detain me till you’re satisfied. I’ll explain everything, and you
may arrest me if you like when I’ve finished—though you won’t. But if
you do it now—I’m dumb.”

The Major took the superintendent to the other end of the room and
held a whispered conversation with him. Proctor calmly lighted a cigar
and handed his case to Colson. The latter refused it with a shake of
the head, and the little man only grinned exasperatingly at him.

Then the Major came forward.

“Very well, Mr. Proctor,” he said stiffly, “we will take you into
Frattenbury, please, on detention for the present. But I warn you that
there are ugly facts against you.”

“I know there are,” said Proctor coolly, “and I was a bit glad to hear
that Jew’s evidence just now—and to hear the doctor repeat his. But
I’ve nothing to be afraid of. I’m quite ready, Major.”

It was when they arrived at the police station that Proctor explained.
Crosby was present. The Chief Constable had told him something about
the affair as he motored him into Frattenbury.

“You may as well hear what he’s got to say,” he said.

Proctor was accommodated with a chair in the private office at the
police station. The superintendent sat at his desk, pen in hand. Major
Renshaw began:

“Now, Mr. Proctor, we will hear what you have to say, if you please.”

“Very well, Major. Will you kindly send for Mr. Stephen Merrifield?
His place of business is just opposite here.”

“The corn merchant?”

“Exactly. You’ll take his word, I suppose?”

Without replying the Major sent for Merrifield. The little man went
on:

“When I first had a notion that you were suspecting me, Mr. Colson,”
he said, addressing the detective, “was that Monday morning when I
recovered my canoe. My nephew told me what you had asked him about
disturbing me in the dark hours, and so on, and I knew you wouldn’t
have said it without some reason. Also, I saw you were interested in
that canoe being taken away—though for the life of me I can’t guess
why. I put two and two together and came to the conclusion that you
were trying to find out whether I had run off with my own canoe, and
left it where it was pretty sure Phil would find it in the morning.
And it puzzled me. But it also put me on my guard.”

“Go on,” said the superintendent.

“Well, then came the inquest. When the doctor said that death might
have occurred after midnight, I was just a little perturbed—you’ll see
why presently. I suppose I was the nearest person to Templeton—his
yacht lay just opposite my house. And when Canon Fittleworth handed in
that cigar band, for the moment I was fairly alarmed.”

“That’s why you cha——” began the superintendent, but Colson stopped
him with a warning gesticulation.

“Eh?” asked Proctor.

“Oh—nothing,” said the superintendent. “Go on, please.”

“Although the Canon stated the cigar was one of his own special brand,
I knew I had the same brand in my house. Why,” he said to the
superintendent, “you smoked one yourself—on the Sunday morning, and
remarked how good it was. Don’t you remember?”

“I do,” said the superintendent, “but I never noticed the band.”

“I was wondering if you had,” went on Proctor, with a smile. “Then I
wanted the coroner to put a question to the Canon, but he wouldn’t
allow it.”

“What was the question?” asked Major Renshaw.

“I only wanted him to ask whether the Canon could remember to whom he
gave any of his cigars. But I concluded afterwards that you would
examine the reverend gentleman pretty closely on that point. I gather
you _did_, and came to the conclusion that it wasn’t in that quarter
that you had to make your investigations.”

“Meanwhile,” said Major Renshaw, “knowing you possessed the same brand
of cigar, and in order to put us off your track——”

But he was interrupted. A newcomer was shown in, a portly man with
grey moustache and short beard and a round, jovial face.

“Oh, good afternoon, Mr. Merrifield,” said the Chief Constable. “Do
you mind waiting just a minute?”

“Certainly, sir.” He looked round the room, nodded affably to Mr.
Proctor, and took the seat which Colson offered him.

“Go on, Mr. Proctor.”

“Where was I? Oh, yes—I know. Well, very soon after the inquest, I
found I was being watched. That wasn’t much of a fisherman you sent
over to Marsh Quay, Mr. Colson! Oh, yes, I knew. When I went over to
Portsmouth last Monday on business, and found that this fisherman
travelled by the same train there and back, I was pretty certain.”

“We were bound to keep an eye on you,” said the superintendent.

“I don’t dispute it. But I’m afraid, as an innocent man, I resented
it. My way of looking at it was that I’d have liked you to come and
have the whole thing out with me. Of course, you know your own methods
best. Anyhow, yesterday I set a little trap for you, Mr. Colson. I
hope you’ll forgive me.”

“A trap?” said Colson.

“In this way. I saw you lounging about at Marsh Quay. I imagined you
wanted me out of the way, so I started for Frattenbury. But I very
soon retraced my steps, and let myself in at the back door. Out of the
window I saw you in my garden. I came out and asked you in. Then I
made an excuse for leaving you in my dining-room, which was what you
wanted, I imagine.”

Colson looked very black, especially as the superintendent gave him an
amused glance.

“Well,” went on the little man, “while you were examining the contents
of my cigar cupboard I was watching you from outside, through the
window. I was behind the laurel bush opposite it! You took one of
those cigars. I’d counted ’em first. So I guessed you were going to
arrest me pretty soon.”

“That’s all very well, so far as it goes,” said the Chief Constable,
“but it’s only your own story. It doesn’t in any way clear you.”

“I know. But you’ll soon be satisfied. In the first place, the
evidence of Isaac Moss—which you allow—proves that the crime was
committed before one o’clock on the Sunday morning, eh, Major?”

“Yes, I concede that.”

“Very well. Now will you hear what Mr. Merrifield has to say?”

Merrifield was just going to speak, but the Chief Constable held up
his hand for silence.

“What do you wish me to ask him, Mr. Proctor?”

“Where I was on the Saturday night.”

“If you know that, Mr. Merrifield, perhaps you’ll tell us?”

“Why, of course I will. You don’t mean to say you’ve been thinking my
friend here committed a murder? Why, he wouldn’t hurt a fly! It’s all
right, Major Renshaw. Mr. Proctor had supper in my house on the
Saturday night in question. He and my wife and a friend staying with
us played bridge afterwards, and I’m ashamed to say we went on into
Sunday morning. It was close on one o’clock when we finished the last
rubber. It’s a lonesome sort of a walk to Marsh Quay, so I offered to
run Mr. Proctor back in my car—and did.”

The superintendent brought his hand down on the desk.

“That explains what Joe Thatcher said about a motor!” he exclaimed.
“Well, Mr. Merrifield?”

“That’s all there is, Superintendent. It didn’t take long to get down
there. I stopped the car opposite his gate, and he asked me to go in.
I went, and I don’t deny that we had a final whisky and soda to wind
up the evening. It was exactly half-past one by the clock on his
mantelpiece when I went out and came back to Frattenbury. I hope that
satisfies you?”

“Am I to be set at liberty?” asked Proctor dryly.

The little man looked so quaint, with his bald, egg-shaped head, that
Major Renshaw could scarcely restrain a smile.

“There’s nothing else we can do with you, Mr. Proctor. But I wish you
had told us all this before.”

Proctor drew himself up with an air of injured dignity.

“I objected to being shadowed,” he said. “It put my back up. You’ll
confess it wouldn’t have been wise to have arrested me?”

“Ah, don’t say any more, Mr. Proctor. We’ll try to forgive you this
time. I’m sorry we’ve upset you, but we’re quite satisfied now.”

“You don’t want me any longer, Major?” asked Merrifield. “All right.
Come along, Proctor, old chap. You’ll be wanting something to pick you
up after all this, and I’ve got it at my house.”

When they were gone the Major, the superintendent and Anthony Crosby
looked at each other for a moment or two, and then simultaneously
burst into a roar of laughter. But Colson did not join in. His face
was as black as a thunder-cloud.

“Come,” said Crosby to the Chief Constable, “you’ll admit he fairly
had you, Major Renshaw? Aren’t you glad you didn’t arrest him?”

“I am,” said the Major grimly. “I confess it. Conceited little beggar!
I’m glad he had a fright, though. He did, you know, or he wouldn’t
have changed that cigar band at the inquest.”

“Ah,” said the lawyer reflectively, “it was only natural, I suppose. A
sudden impulse, you know. I can quite understand that even an innocent
man, suddenly confronted with such a damning bit of evidence against
him, should succumb to the temptation and take advantage of his
peculiar opportunity. How do you think he did it?”

“I know,” said Colson gloomily—“there were several bands from
Grayson’s cigars lying in the grate. He picked up one of those. I
remembered afterwards—I could almost swear I saw him do it. That was
what put us on to Grayson. We’ve taken all three suspects—and now
there’s an end of them.”

The Chief Constable, beneath his somewhat stiff military bearing, was
a kindly man. He put his hand on the detective’s shoulder.

“Come, Colson,” he said, “you couldn’t help it. It’s a bit of a
set-back, I know; but after all, it’s cleared the ground.”

Colson looked up, and blurted out what was on his mind:

“Are you going to call in Scotland Yard, sir?”

The superintendent looked hard at Major Renshaw, but said nothing. The
Major reflected. Then he said:

“You shall have another week, Colson. Get on with the job and see what
you can do.”

“Thank you, sir.”

“Look here,” broke in Crosby. “I’ve got a train to catch, and I’d
almost forgotten—I want to have a look at that blotting-pad. I’ve got
the copy, but I want to see the original.”

The superintendent produced it. The lawyer took it to the light,
pulled a big magnifying glass out a of his pocket, and examined it
carefully.

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “my guess is correct. Who made the copy?”

“I did,” said Colson.

“You’ve left out something. Look here—through my glass. Take that word
ICES. Do you notice, first of all, that there’s a slightly bigger
space between the E and the S than there is between the other
letters?”

“Y-e-s,” admitted the detective.

“And can you see, with the help of the glass, anything between the E
and the S?”

“There’s the faintest little mark—not between them, but just over the
space.”

“Exactly. And that’s a comma—an apostrophe. It isn’t EZRA’S ICES at
all; it’s EZRA, then three spaces, then ICE’S. The first space
represents the division between the two words, so we want two letters
before ICES. EZRA being a Christian name, it follows in all
probability that the other is a surname. Now, what surnames of five
letters end in ICE? Take the supposition first, that the second
missing letter is a vowel. You might have ‘Daice,’ ‘Laice,’
‘Maice’—they don’t look likely, eh?—or ‘Reice,’ or ‘Joice’—generally
spelt with a ‘y’—or ‘Juice.’ I’ve tried every consonant as a first
letter. Take consonants as the second letter, and put any vowels as
the first, and you don’t make much either. But there are just two
fairly common surnames that you can get by using two consonants as the
first two letters, and they are ‘PRICE’ and ‘GRICE.’ If I were working
on this clue, I should go for Ezra Price or Ezra Grice.”

The three men followed him closely.

“Now take the next two words, connected by the ‘&.’ I’ve only time to
give you a hasty deduction. There are two words which would agree with
the spaces in the first word—‘profession’ or ‘confession.’ ‘ROO’ is at
the end of the line of writing. It has obviously only one letter in
front of it, and one, or perhaps two, after it. I’ve tried every
consonant as the first letter—with only one result. And I make the
word ‘PROOF’ or ‘PROOFS.’ There you are—‘Ezra Price’s (or Grice’s)
confession and proof.’ It looks interesting. Whoever it was to whom
Templeton wrote that letter, he knew something about Ezra Price—or
Grice.”

“That looks feasible,” said the Chief Constable.

“I’ll tell you what I’ll do,” went on the lawyer. “As Templeton’s
representative—he’s made me his executor—I’ll put an advertisement in
the papers asking anyone who heard from him since he returned to
England to communicate with me and tell me the nature of the
correspondence. If a reference to this letter turns up, well and good.
If not, it’s a process of elimination, and we can assume that the
recipient doesn’t want to give it away. Let me do this—then there
won’t be a question of the police having anything to do with it. I
must run; I’ve only just time to catch my train. I’ll let you know the
result.”



CHAPTER XVII

New Theories

“You’ve just got to solve it, Bob, and you’re going to solve it,” said
Mrs. Colson that night to her somewhat disconsolate husband. “And that
for two reasons: first because such a wicked wretch ought to be
punished, and secondly because you’re my dear hubby. So there now!”

She gave him a kiss and took a chair by him in front of the fire.

“I’ve got to begin all over again,” he said moodily.

“Of course you have, dear. And what of that? You’ve ever so much
better a chance now you’ve cleared away the hindrances. Now, let’s
begin. We’re going to talk it over, Bob, and your wife is going to
help you with her big brain—oh, ever so much!”

“Well, I’ve got a week’s probation, so to speak,” he said, “and I’ll
jolly well try. All right, we’ll talk it over. You shall begin.”

She put her elbows on her knees and rested her chin on her hands.

“First of all, then, let’s get rid of all the old theories. You’ve
gone on the supposition that the murderer was near the spot all the
time, haven’t you?”

“Well, it looked like it.”

“I know. Now, is there anyone else living there whom you could
suspect?”

By this time he had a mental category of every man, woman and child at
Marsh Quay. He turned it over.

“No,” he said, “only boatmen and labourers—and a retired parson who
lives near, a very nice chap. Rule him out.”

“Very well. Then we’ll begin by assuming that the murderer came from a
distance.”

“Frattenbury?”

“Possibly. We’ll get back to that later on. Next point—the motive. Up
to now you’ve thought it was to get the diamonds. Let’s throw that
out; I’m sick of the diamonds.”

“You wouldn’t be if you had ’em, dear. All right, then the diamonds
shall go. Let’s say he was after something else.”

“And that something else was Templeton’s life.”

“Eh?”

“Why not? There is such a thing as premeditated murder, isn’t there?”

“You may be right,” he assented, “or Templeton may have been possessed
of something else——”

“That was worth taking his life to get! Remember _that_!” she said,
lifting a warning finger. “People don’t generally commit murder for
the sake of killing anyone, you know. Now, let’s get on. Let’s try and
picture how it was done.”

“I told you last night how I’d worked it out, dear. The murderer went
on board in the dinghy——”

“Stop, stop. Now remember, Bob, that’s an old theory. Everything we
discuss to-night must be a new idea. That theory presupposes that the
murderer was on the yacht first. Put it away. Tell me what other
alternatives were there? I’m out of my depth here.”

He thought carefully for a few minutes and replied:

“Only three, as far as I can see. First, some boat from outside came
in. Not likely, because one of the canoes was found unfastened in the
morning. Mrs. Yates told me this. Secondly, that the murderer went out
to the yacht in the canoe after Templeton had returned. Also unlikely,
because he would scarcely have transferred his stick to the dinghy.
Thirdly, that hardly seems probable.”

“Then it’s worth consideration, Bob. You’ve gone, too much, on
probabilities. Let’s have this ‘thirdly,’ please.”

She had never heard of the theologian’s famous dictum, “_Credo, quia
incredibile est_,” but it was the same line of reasoning.

“It’s this, then. Templeton himself rowed the murderer out in the
dinghy, the latter sitting in the stern and laying his stick down as
he sat. They both went on board and the murder was committed. Now
comes the improbable part. The murderer rowed back to shore in the
dinghy, ran the canoe down to the water, paddled back towing the
dinghy, made the latter fast again to the yacht, and finally returned
in the canoe, dragging her up again, but forgetting to fasten her
painter to the post as before.”

For some minutes Mrs. Colson gazed steadily into the fire in silence.
Colson refilled and lighted his pipe, and waited. Then she said:

“I see. But he might have had a very artful object in doing this. If
he went on board with Templeton, and he didn’t live at Marsh Quay, he
must have met him somewhere else first—and gone with him. Well, if
he’d only landed in the dinghy and left it on the shore, it would have
been a clear proof that Templeton had taken him on board—and if, by
any chance, they had happened to be seen by anybody _first_—he would
naturally have been suspected. His very best plan would be to leave
the dinghy fast to the yacht, and he could only have done so in the
way you say.”

Colson smoked for a moment or two.

“It was taking a big risk—risking time for getting clear away.”

“It was worth it, Bob. Would it make much noise—getting the canoe down
to the water?”

“Oh, no; it was lying on a patch of grass—the grass grows right down
to the water’s edge, you know—and if the tide wasn’t quite up—and it
wasn’t—there would be soft, sandy mud just there between the green and
the water’s edge. The stony part of the beach is nearer the quay. And
the canoe is almost light enough for a strong man to carry. No, there
needn’t have been any noise.”

She looked at him and smiled.

“We’re getting on, then.”

“There’s another point in favour—ah, you’ve scored again, dear—I was
just going to say that it would make things look so improbable.”

They both laughed heartily. Suddenly a little shadow came over her
face.

“My dear,” she said, “he’s a very clever man—I’m sure he is. Do take
care, Bob.”

“What do you mean?”

“When you match your wits against a man like this you have to be
careful. And he probably knows you’re doing it.”

“That’s all right,” he said; “he’s put me down as a blunderer long
ago. Remember, he knows nothing about the walking-stick or the cigar.
He can’t suspect.”

“Don’t let him, then. Well—let’s follow it up. He walked out with
Templeton from Frattenbury.”

“What makes you say that?”

“It don’t know—just because I’m a woman, and you can’t expect me
always to reason things out and say why. But I am going to think
now—don’t speak, Bob.”

There was a long silence. She suddenly turned towards him, gripped his
hand, and said:

“Bob!”

“What?”

“Suppose you’re mistaken again! And by our plan you _are_, you
know—because we’re trying everything fresh.”

“I don’t see what——”

“Don’t interrupt, dear. Suppose those stick marks were not made by
Templeton going _into_ Frattenbury, but were made by the murderer
walking out with him.”

“But that’s not likely. They were on the right side of the path coming
in, and——”

“You silly dear! But they were on the left-hand side going out.
Bob—look out for a left-handed man!”

“By Jove!” he exclaimed, “there’s something in that. In that case
Templeton _carried_ his stick in with him and didn’t put it to the
ground.”

“Was he short or tall?”

“Medium—inclined to be short.”

She clapped her hands.

“That’s it, dear!—look out for a tall, left-handed man. If only you
could find out whether Templeton _carried_ his stick—for certain——?”

“Stop—stop a bit!”

He got up and paced the little room, smoking furiously.

“I know!” he exclaimed, stopping suddenly. “There _is_ a chance of
finding out. If only he remembers.”

“Who?”

“I won’t tell you till I’m certain. Go on, dear.”

She waited a little.

“I can’t think of any more, Bob. Is there anything else
_new_—anything, I mean, that you haven’t followed up yet?”

“There’s that blotting-pad,” he said. “I don’t know that there’s
anything in it——”

“Then for goodness’ sake follow it up, Bob. That’s what I _mean_.”

“Well, the lawyer from London, Mr. Crosby, gave me a hint about that.
I’ll tell you.”

He produced his copy and showed her what Crosby had pointed out.

“Ezra Price—or Ezra Grice,” she said, “let’s take it then. How would
you work on it?”

After a bit he said:

“Well, the only way is this. If we take the letter at all as part of
the business, and fit it in with these new theories, we must assume
that the man to whom it was written knows something about Ezra. And we
are assuming that this man lives—or was at the time—in Frattenbury.
But I’ve never heard the name of Ezra—Price or Grice.”

“But you’ve only lived in Frattenbury six years, dear. Of course you
can’t expect to have heard of him. Can’t you find out if he was ever
here, or if anyone knew anything about him?”

“I might,” he said. “Mr. Buckland, the chemist, has got a pretty fair
memory of all kinds of people. He’s lived here all his life. We often
go to him when we want to find out the past of anyone. I’ll try him
to-morrow.”

She jumped up from her seat. “I’m going to get supper now, Bob. We’ve
done enough for to-night. Yes, we’ll have it early because you’re
going to be a nice old dear and take me to the pictures, and forget
there was ever a murder at Marsh Quay and a detective who did his
best, and then—even though he was a brainy, oh, ever so clever a man,
and wanted to be an inspector one day—had to take his little wife’s
advice, and pay for it in kisses—oh—that’s enough, Bob—it wasn’t worth
_all_ those.”

“The overplus were for yourself,” said Colson, “and I still owe a
heavy bill.”


Next day Colson, in a far more cheery mood, after seeing Constable
Gadsden for a moment and consulting the latter’s ponderous and
well-thumbed notebook, cycled once more on the now familiar road to
Marsh Quay, where he inquired at a cottage for one George Simmonds,
and was told by his wife that he was helping to load the _Lucy_, which
had returned once more for a cargo of gravel. He very soon found the
man and said to him:

“Have you got a good memory, Simmonds?”

“I remember the last man as stood me a pint o’ beer, guv’nor,” was the
response.

“Well, perhaps you’ll have the same cause to remember me when we’ve
finished. Anyhow, on the morning when the murder was discovered here
you told the police-constable you’d met Mr. Templeton the previous
afternoon—going into Frattenbury.”

“That’s right, guv’nor. ’Twarn’t he as give me that pint, though.”

“Quite so. Now, let’s see if you can tell me how he was dressed.”

The man described him pretty accurately.

“Good,” said the detective; “had he got anything in his hand?”

The man thought a moment.

“Yes—a stick. I didn’t take no notice on it, though—I can’t say what
’twas like.”

“Never mind that. Was he carrying it or walking with it?”

Simmonds grinned sheepishly and shook his head.

“Look here,” said Colson, picking up a bit of stick that was lying on
the ground, “this is what I mean. Did he hold it by the handle and
stick it in the ground like _this_—or carry it, by the middle, _so_?”

“Oh, I can easily tell ’ee that. He had it by the middle, same as you
have now.”

“You’re sure?”

“Sartain, guv’nor—I see him a-doin’ on it.”

“All right. Here you are then.”

The man spat on the coin, pocketed it, and grinned.

“Thankee, guv’nor—that’s good for a quart, that is. I shan’t forget
_you_—if anyone wants to pay me for rememberin’.”

“_One_ to the wife,” said Colson as he sped back to Frattenbury. “Now
for Mr. Buckland.”

He found the chemist standing behind his counter, a grave-looking man
with wrinkled forehead and a big walrus moustache.

“I want a bit of information, if you can give it to me, Mr. Buckland.”

“Certainly. Come inside, won’t you?”

“Inside” was a tiny, dingy parlour at the back of the shop. The
chemist closed the door.

“Well, Mr. Colson?”

“You know most people who’ve lived here the last forty years, Mr.
Buckland. Did you ever hear of anyone by the name of Ezra Price?”

“Ezra Price,” reflected the chemist—“the name has a sort of familiar
sound. There aren’t many Ezras about, either. Ezra _Price_—it—somehow
doesn’t seem right—yet——”

“Ezra Grice, then.”

“Ezra _Grice_—that seems more like it—yes—now let me think—it must
have been a long time ago——Grice—yes—I know now. He was a lawyer’s
clerk—or something—I’m beginning to remember—a bad lot, wasn’t he? I’m
not sure. Stop, though—I know who’d tell you more about him. He was in
Mr. Norwood’s office—so far as I can recollect.”

“Mr. Norwood?”

“That’s it—you’d better try him.”

“All right, I will,” said the detective. “Thank you very much for
putting me on the scent.”

“Not at all.”

As he passed down the street, however, he saw Mr. Norwood hurrying
into the Magistrates’ Court which was then sitting. So, wishing to see
him at leisure, he called at the lawyer’s house in the evening, when
he felt pretty certain of finding him at home. He waited in the hall
while the maid tapped at the dining-room door and announced him.

“Oh—show him in here,” came a voice from the room.

Francis Norwood had just finished his solitary dinner and was draining
his glass of port.

“Good evening, sergeant,” he said in his formal manner. “Something you
want to see me about? Another inquest?”

“No, sir. But I thought you could give me some information—I was told
you could. I understand there was a young man employed by you—many
years ago.”

“I’ve employed a number of young men in my time—some of them to my
cost! What was his name?”

“Ezra Grice, sir.”

“Oh—oh—yes, I think I remember him. Of course I do.”

He reached for the decanter, noticed it was empty, and said:

“I was going to offer you a glass of port, sergeant, but I see there’s
none left. Will you have a whisky and soda?”

“Thank you, sir.”

Francis Norwood rose stiffly from his chair and opened the door of a
sideboard just behind him.

“Tut, tut!” he exclaimed, “there isn’t any decanter—oh, here’s a
bottle.”

He took a corkscrew from a drawer and drew the cork from the bottle,
Colson looking on in silence. Then he produced two tumblers and poured
whisky into both, filling them up with soda.

One he gave to Colson, and the other he kept for himself. First taking
a drink from it, he said:

“Well, now, I dare say I can help you. May I ask what you want to know
about Ezra Grice?”

“Eh? Oh—yes. Anything you can tell me, sir.”

“And why?”

“It concerns a case we have in hand, sir.”

Colson never gave anything away if he could help it.

“I see. Well, it’s years ago now—quite twenty years, sergeant. Grice
was my clerk. He must have been three or four and twenty at the time.
A sharp young fellow. His parents kept a little bookshop in the North
Street—they’re both dead now. Do you want to know why he left me?”

“If you please, sir.”

“I’m sorry to say I had to dismiss him; I ought to have prosecuted
him, but I didn’t. He robbed me, sergeant. For the sake of his
parents, who were respectable people and implored me not to put him in
prison, I spared him. He left Frattenbury at once, and, so far as I
know, he’s never entered it again.”

“Do you know where he went?”

“I believe he emigrated—the best thing he could do. But, mind you,
I’ve never seen him since.”

“Have you ever heard of him, sir?”

“In a way. A rumour reached me some time ago that he was dead, but I
can’t vouch for it.”

“We should like to get hold of him if he’s alive,” said the detective,
after a short pause.

The lawyer took a sip at his glass, and replied in his dry, precise
manner:

“If you really want him, sergeant, I’d do anything I can in the
matter. Why not advertise for him? You’re quite welcome to use my name
in an advertisement—unless you think if he _is_ alive and sees the
advertisement it might frighten him? But, pray do what you think best.
If you like to step into my office in the morning I can show you his
record—and I may have notes about him you might like to see. Any way,
I’m quite at your service.”

“That is very kind of you, sir. We may try advertising.”

“Do—by all means. I hope it may be successful—if you want him. Good
evening, sergeant. Come to my office in the morning, then.”

When the detective had departed, the lawyer lighted a cigarette and
slowly finished his whisky; then he took up a newspaper he had laid
down on the table when Colson came in, and was studying it when the
maid announced:

“Dr. Hazell, sir.”

“Come in, Hazell.”

The little doctor entered. He was a bit flustered.

“Good evening, Norwood. I haven’t come in to stay. I say, you remember
when I was dining here some nights back Sir Peter told us about
‘Virginian Reefs’—said they were good, don’t you know?”

“Well?”

“I hope to the Lord you won’t get any, Norwood.”

The lawyer laughed his dry, short laugh.

“Why?”

“I was fool enough to buy five hundred of ’em, and they’re down to
fifteen shillings in to-night’s paper.”

“Perhaps they’ll pick up,” said Norwood. “Sir Peter seemed to think
so.”

“The worst of it is there’s another report. Not the one Sir Peter
spoke of, you know—and it’s a bad one. I can’t afford to lose the
money—I shall have to cut the loss. I’ve been a damn fool, Norwood.”

“I’m sorry,” said the lawyer, “but I’m afraid you have.”

“Well, at all events, I thought I’d warn you. Good night. I’ve got a
patient to see.”

“Good night, Doctor. Thank you very much.”


Meanwhile, Colson was making his way to the police station, which was
at the bottom of the South Street. He seemed a little lost in thought,
for he nearly ran into Canon Fittleworth, who was coming out of the
Close to post a letter.

“Oh,” said the Canon, recognising him, “have you got five minutes to
spare? Thanks. If you don’t mind coming round to my house a minute,
I’ve got that list ready.”

“I should like to have it very much, sir,” replied Colson.

The worthy Canon prided himself on his accuracy of detail. In his
study he produced his list.

“Mrs. Fittleworth and my daughter have carefully refreshed my memory,”
he said. “Half a dozen times we’ve gone over all the men who dined
here—or smoked with me—since I received that box of cigars. Here’s the
list. I hope it won’t help you in one way—I mean, they are all my
intimate friends!”

He handed a paper to the detective, who ran his eye down the names
eagerly. They were all prominent Frattenbury gentlemen—Dr. Hazell, Sir
Peter Birchnall, Cathedral dignitaries, and so on.

“I suppose you can’t remember if anyone here took away a cigar without
smoking it, sir?”

“Yes, I can,” said the Canon. “One of them who was dining here a few
weeks ago was so struck with the flavour, that I gave him a dozen of
them—put ’em in an empty box, and he took them with him.”

“Indeed. Who was he?”

And the Canon replied dryly, a twinkle in his eye:

“The Dean!”

Colson waited till he got outside the house. Then he said what he
thought:

“Damn these parsons!”



CHAPTER XVIII

Sir James Perrivale’s Story

The advertisement inquiring for news of the whereabouts of Ezra Grice,
some time of Frattenbury, was duly inserted in _The Times_ and other
daily papers. The Chief Constable demurred a little at first, but
finally agreed with Colson that there might be something in it,
although, after the lapse of such a long period, the discovery of the
individual in question had many chances against it.

At the end of the week Colson had a letter from Anthony Crosby, in
which he said:

  My advertisement for any correspondents of the late Mr. Templeton
  has had few results, and I send you them for what they are worth. I
  have, for convenience’s sake, tabulated them as follows:

  1. Two letters written to friends at his club—one from Salcombe and
  another from Poole—ordinary letters stating he was shortly coming up
  to London.

  2. Four letters to tradesmen, ordering certain goods.

  3. A letter to the editor of a magazine of travel, arranging for the
  publication of an article.

  Neither of these, for I have made inquiries, refers to the matter of
  Ezra Grice. We may, therefore, build upon the elimination theory,
  and presume that if the recipient of the letter has seen my
  advertisement he prefers to say nothing about it.

  I notice that you are advertising for this man Grice. If it will
  help you, I am willing to offer a reward of £50 for information
  which may produce him. Pray use your discretion in this matter when
  you re-advertise.

  I think I have now succeeded in piecing together the whole of the
  blotting-pad letter. You have probably arrived at a similar
  conclusion. Some may be guess-work, but I am inclined to believe
  that it reads thus:

  “hand over Ezra Grice’s confession & proof.
  This is final.”

  Of course it is only a bit of the whole letter, but it is not
  without interest.

The police were debating as to whether they should take advantage of
the lawyer’s offer of the reward, when a tall, weather-beaten
individual, with a close-cropped moustache, got out of the London
train at Frattenbury and inquired his way to the police head-quarters.
He was dressed in a loose knickerbocker suit of excellent West End
cut, and walked with the air of a man of resource and authority. He
sent in his card and asked to see the superintendent of police.

“Sir James Perrivale,” read the superintendent. “The name seems
familiar. Show him in, Peters.”

“Good morning,” said Sir James. “I’ve called about that
advertisement—you know, what?”

“Advertisement?”

“The what-d’ye-call-it—that fellow named Grice. I saw the thing in my
club yesterday.”

“Pray sit down, Sir James. We shall be glad if you can give us any
information about him.”

“Look here, Superintendent, I want to know what you want him for.
Anything against him? The poor devil’s gone through enough already.
What?”

“We don’t know anything against him, but we certainly want to find out
about him.”

“Wasn’t it down here somewhere that poor Templeton was murdered?”

“Yes, Sir James—about two miles off.”

“Queer coincidence, what? Perhaps that’s what you want him for?”

“I don’t understand, Sir James.”

“Eh? Oh, I thought perhaps you knew Grice was with him in South
Africa.”

“Was he, by George?” exclaimed the superintendent. “We never knew
that. We only wish we had more details about Mr. Templeton; it might
help us. Do you know anything?”

“Oh, Lord, no! Only I knew Templeton—over the water, and Grice too,
and I was interested, what?”

“Will you tell us what you know?”

“Of course I will. Want me to make a statement? All right. Well, I’ve
only just got back from South Africa. Been doing a bit of big-game
shooting up country—I’m speaking of three or four months ago. I had a
camp up beyond the Umbrati river, and Templeton struck it. He was on
his way back. Queer chap, you know. Used to go and bury himself for a
couple o’ years in the interior—exploring. Well, as I was saying, he
struck our camp. He was in a pretty low way, too, only a few of his
natives and this chap Grice left—very little ammunition. Clothes like
a scarecrow.”

“What was Grice doing with him?”

“He’d taken him, see? Grice had been in the country years—Boer War,
trading, diamond finding, ivory—all sorts of things. Sort o’ chap down
on his luck and then up again. But he knew a lot—he was a useful man.
Spoke most of the dialects and understood handling natives. Templeton
picked him up at Johannesburg, and got him to go with him. Poor
wretch! Never thought he’d bring him back.”

“What was the matter?”

“Lots. Broken arm, fever, and all sorts of complications. They’d had
to carry him on a stretcher for a week or more. Thin as a lath. I had
a few drugs—they’d nothing left—and did what I could. But he looked
like pegging out pretty soon.”

“Did he?”

“I’ll tell you. Templeton, you see, was in a hurry to get on. Don’t
wonder. Grice was at death’s door, and he had to leave him. There was
something or other first—Grice’s will, I fancy. Anyhow, Templeton was
with him a long time the day before he left, and then called me and
Ottery—Colonel Ottery, you know, who was shooting with me—to witness
Grice’s signature.

“The next morning Templeton left. We’d rigged him out a bit, and gave
him what we could spare. We knew he’d be all right. I promised him I’d
give Grice a decent burial.”

“And——”

“No, we didn’t. One of my men—Zulu, he was—asked to take him in
hand—uncle had been a medicine man, and he knew something about it,
what? Queer things they know sometimes about herbs and so on, pretend
they’re magic, of course. The poor wretch was so far gone that it
didn’t seem to matter, so I let the chap take him in hand. Poured a
scalding hot drink down his throat, put white powder in his
eyes—rubbed him down—all sorts of things. But it answered. Before we
broke up that camp, Superintendent, Grice was walking about again.”

“What happened to him?”

“I brought him down to Cape Town and set him on his legs. He’d got a
bit of cash. Templeton had paid him a lump sum down before he took
him, and he’d banked it. Anyhow, he said he should stay at Cape Town
for a bit till he was strong again—so there he is.”

“Sir James,” said the superintendent, “I’m most greatly obliged to
you—more than I can say. But we must have Grice here—as soon as
possible. How shall we get him?”

“You haven’t a charge against him?”

“No, no. It’s not a question of bringing him over on an extradition
warrant. He must come of his own accord. We want him at once. But
there’s a difficulty.”

“What’s that, eh?”

“He left this town twenty years ago, when he got into trouble. He was
not prosecuted, but it might make him suspicious.”

Sir James Perrivale thought a moment.

“Tell me, Superintendent, in confidence, of course, is it anything to
do with Templeton’s murder, because it looks like it to me, what?”

“Yes, it is. Grice may help us materially in getting on the track of
our man. That’s why we want him.”

“Tell you what, then. I always liked Templeton—queer chap though he
was. I’ll help you. Grice will listen to me. I’ll cable for him to
come over by the next boat—and cable him the passage.”

“If it’s a question of expense, Sir James——”

“No, no. I’d like to. Leave it to me. I’ll get him for you. And now
I’m here you might do something for me. I’ve read about the murder, of
course. How can I get to the place to have a look at it? Morbid
curiosity, what?”

“I’ll run you down now in a car, with pleasure.”

When they arrived at Marsh Quay it was peaceful enough. The tide was
in, bathed in a sunshine splendour. Sir James remarked:

“Queer, isn’t it? Here’s this chap Templeton, risked his life over and
over again, all sorts of adventures, escapes, and so on, and he gets
done to death in a quiet, beautiful spot like this—in the midst of our
civilisation, what? Gad, I wonder who did it? I mustn’t ask what you
know?”

“You may ask, Sir James. But I can’t tell you—only—I think things are
beginning to move. Did you know Mr. Templeton well?”

“Met him several times—here and abroad,” said Sir James, as they
turned away from the water’s edge. “Nobody knew him well; he wasn’t
that sort. And nobody I ever met could turn him if he’d once made up
his mind to do a thing—and he did queer things at times. If he thought
a course was right, he’d stick to it—conventionality and advice and
prudence be damned! I shouldn’t wonder if it wasn’t something of this
kind that brought that knife into his heart.”

Sir James went away, promising to let the superintendent know how
things were shaping, and the latter rang up Colson, who was in his
house. He went to the police station at once, and listened attentively
to the story, but made little comment.

He was still working more or less in the dark and was puzzled. But he
acknowledged that the prospect was brighter.

As he went up the street afterwards, he met Francis Norwood coming out
of the bank. The lawyer stopped him.

“Well, sergeant. I’ve seen your advertisements. Have you found Ezra
Grice?”

“No, sir,” said Colson truthfully, for he had not found him.

“I see. Well, as I said before—anything I can do, you know.”

“Thank you, sir.”

The detective stood, lost in thought, as Norwood went on his
way—looking at him. Then he shook his head slowly, went back to the
police station, asked for the copy of the proceedings at the inquest,
took it home and studied it till his wife literally dragged him out of
his chair to come to the meal. But he was very silent as he ate, and
as soon as the meal was over, returned to his perusal of the report.
Then he took out his notebook and made quite long entries.



CHAPTER XIX

Colson Makes an Appointment

Anthony Crosby, busy man as he was, found a little time to follow up,
from a natural curiosity, the strange letter that Reginald Templeton
had addressed to him. As the letter had surmised, this was not very
difficult to do. He consulted several old law lists, and made certain
inquiries at the office of the Law Society in Chancery Lane.

The result was that he went to the newspaper reading-room, of the
British Museum, where he had a reader’s ticket, applied for files of
newspapers twenty years old, and very soon made himself acquainted
with the charge that had been brought against Winnie’s father all
those years ago. He shook his head as he read the case—embezzlement of
clients’ monies.

“No wonder Templeton advised her mother to keep it from the girl,” he
murmured. “No—there is no occasion to tell her now—— Hallo! That’s
curious!”

He read on carefully, then gave back the file of papers to the
attendant. As he walked away he said to himself:

“This chap Ezra Grice is a bit of a puzzle. I wonder what Templeton
knew about him? I think I’ll run down to Frattenbury and have a talk
with the Chief Constable; it’s better than writing. I can do it
without mentioning Winnie Cotterill, of course. She mustn’t come in.”

Walking down Kingsway he met a friend of his, a stockbroker whom he
had not seen for some time, and invited him to a cup of tea at a
neighbouring restaurant. In the course of conversation the broker
remarked:

“I was saying something to my partner this morning not very
complimentary to your profession, Crosby.”

“What was that?”

“That the three classes of persons who make fools of themselves in
finance are lawyers, parsons and old women.”

“That’s not kind,” said Crosby with a laugh.

“It’s true, though. We’ve had a big slump in the mining market
to-day—‘Virginian Reefs.’ You haven’t got any, I hope?”

“Not I!”

“You’re lucky. They’ve gone down to three or four shillings—if you can
get a bid. Now, look here, Crosby. I’m ready to bet you a new hat that
you’ll find a lot of old women and parsons and lawyers—not one of ’em
knowing anything about mines—well hit over the job. I’ve bought
myself, for a country vicar and the curate of a seaside town—and the
biggest order I had for ‘Virginian Reefs’ came from a lawyer—a chap
who won’t take my advice.”

“Who is he?”

“That’s not a fair question. Staid old chap, living in a cathedral
town—Frattenbury. I’ve had a frantic wire from him to sell out, but
there aren’t bidders for all the lot he holds. Well, he’s wealthy, and
can afford to drop a bit. Good-bye, old chap. I must be off.”


Down in quiet, sleepy Frattenbury the superintendent received a wire
that day from Sir James Perrivale:

  E. G. started from Cape. Boat due Plymouth December 8.

“It’s a waiting game, sir, then, for a few weeks,” said Colson, to
whom the superintendent showed the wire. “But I want a little time.”

“Your week’s up, and more,” said the other. “Have you anything to tell
the chief? He’s getting restive.”

“All right,” said Colson. “I can tell him enough to keep him
quiet—though I’ve several things to see to before I can satisfy him.
I’m just off for a final visit to Marsh Quay. There’s a question I
want to ask that little blighter, Proctor, which has only just
occurred to me.”

“What’s that?”

But Colson only shook his head, and started forth on his bicycle. The
little man grinned at him when he was shown into his house at Marsh
Quay.

“Come to arrest me again?”

“No, Mr. Proctor, I haven’t. But I want to ask you something. Just
carry your mind back to the inquest. Do you remember how that cigar
band went round the jury?”

“Yes—perfectly. The Canon gave it to the coroner and he handed it to
the jury. Nine of them had it before it came to me. I handed it over
to the two others—across the table—and they returned it to the
coroner.”

“Yes—that’s so. Then I suppose you recognised that band across the
table—or somehow—before it got to you?”

“No, I didn’t. It was only when I found it in my hand that I
recognised it. Why do you ask?”

“Then why the dickens did you get ready to change it before you knew
what it was?”

“_Change_ it!” exclaimed Proctor. “What are you talking about? I never
changed it!”

“What?” cried the detective, springing from his seat. “Do you mean to
tell me you never——” He stopped suddenly. “Good Lord!” he said,
sitting down in his chair again.

“What is it?” asked Proctor.

The detective thought rapidly.

“One of those two jurymen must have changed it,” he said. “It was
another band we found we had afterwards. For heaven’s sake keep your
mouth shut about it, Mr. Proctor.”

“The jurymen. What—Bailey or Westall? They were the two. Why, my dear
sir, Bailey is a most respectable man—so is Westall.”

“It isn’t a respectable man we’re after, Mr. Proctor. It’s a murderer.
Remember, we even suspected _you_.”

“But I can’t believe——”

“Don’t try, sir, don’t try. Promise me you’ll say nothing, now. It
mustn’t get out till we’ve investigated.”

“Of course I’ll say nothing. But you astound me.”

“I’m astounded myself,” said Colson, “though I really ought not to be.
Good day, Mr. Proctor—mum’s the word, remember.”

He rushed back to Frattenbury and called at the Deanery. To his
question, the maid informed him the Dean was abroad, and wouldn’t be
back till the first week in December. His language, as he came away,
concerning clergy in general and Cathedral dignitaries in particular,
was awful.

For two hours that evening he was closeted with the Chief Constable
and the superintendent. All three men were exceedingly grave. Major
Renshaw said at length:

“We must get all the evidence, Colson. It’s an awful thing, if it’s
true. How about that stick!”

“I don’t want to have to use it till we’ve proved the rest, sir. He
might slip out of our hands on that alone.”

“Also, there’s Ezra Grice,” said the superintendent.

“Yes—there’s Ezra Grice,” repeated the Chief Constable. “We’ll wait
for him.”


As the weeks went by, Frattenbury and the newspapers forgot all about
the murder. There were other matters for local gossip. People hinted
that Francis Norwood was getting closer than ever with his cash. He
demanded payments almost before he gave advice or transacted business.
He sold a block of cottages belonging to him. And sundry creditors
began to say they wished he was as ready to pay his bills as he was to
be paid.

The Dean returned from his trip to the Riviera, and Colson called on
him again. This time he came out of the Deanery evoking blessings on
the heads of the clergy, instead of curses. There was another long
conference between the three policemen—and their faces were graver
than ever. Colson watched the shipping news anxiously, and one day
took himself off to Plymouth, returning with a sallow-faced man who
joined the trio at a further conference that evening—and it was very
late when Colson took the stranger to his own house—where Mrs. Colson
had a spare room ready for him.

“To-morrow, then,” the Chief Constable had said, when Colson left, and
Colson had repeated the words.

In the morning, the detective, who was carrying the stick he had found
in the dinghy, met Canon Fittleworth. He stopped him.

“In confidence, sir,” he said, “I shall have some news to tell you
this evening—about your late cousin. Shall you be at home?”

“Indeed?” said the Canon, much interested. “Let me see—I’m alone in
the house, and I’ve asked Mr. Norwood to dine with me—at half-past
seven. Can you come about an hour earlier?”

A smile lingered on the detective’s face, and he replied:

“Mr. Norwood might like to hear my news as well. Should I be intruding
at—say nine o’clock?”

“Come, by all means.”

“Thank you, sir—you won’t mention this to Mr. Norwood?”

“If you don’t want me to.”

“I’d rather not, sir.”

“Very well.”

Colson, after this interview, did not pursue his way up the street.
Instead, he retraced it to the police station.

“Better still, by and by,” he remarked.

About eight o’clock he was walking up the street again, carrying the
stick. He rang the bell of a quiet house in a quiet street. He was
about five minutes inside that house, and then he went back to the
police station, outwardly calm, but inwardly realising that this was
the most intense moment of his life.

“It’s perfectly true, sir,” he said to the Chief Constable, holding
out the walking-stick.

The Chief Constable sighed deeply.

“Very well,” he said, “then there’s nothing more to say about it.”

A little before nine the three policemen, and the stranger staying in
Colson’s house, walked up the South Street together, and disappeared
through the gateway half-way up the street into the quiet regions of
the Cathedral Close.

“I ordered the taxi, sir,” said Colson. “It will be all ready—outside
the house—about half-past nine.”

Major Renshaw nodded in silence. He was feeling the situation acutely.



CHAPTER XX

Colson’s “Imagination”

The maid who opened the door looked a little surprised when she found
herself confronted with the four men.

“I think the Canon is engaged,” she began, “he has someone——”

“Oh, he’s expecting us—one of us, at least,” said the Chief Constable.
“I think he’ll see us. Who is with him?”

“Mr. Norwood, sir.”

“Very well, will you show us in, please? Except this gentleman—he will
wait in the hall.”

The Canon rose from his seat as the three policemen entered. Neither
of them was in uniform. Major Renshaw, a punctilious man, wore evening
dress. He always dressed for dinner.

Francis Norwood, seated in an arm-chair near the fire, also rose when
he saw Major Renshaw. The Canon held out his hand in greeting.

“This is a surprise,” he said; “I hardly expected——”

“You must forgive this intrusion, Canon,” interrupted the Chief
Constable. “Sergeant Colson mentioned that he was going to see you
this evening, and we’ve taken the liberty of coming with him.”

As he spoke he did not take the Canon’s proffered hand. Instead, he
bowed stiffly to him and Francis Norwood—who sat down once more.
Indeed, the whole attitude of Major Renshaw savoured of officialism.
The Canon apparently, noticed it. He stiffened slightly.

“Won’t you sit down?” he asked.

The Chief Constable and the superintendent took the chairs he offered
near the middle of the room. Colson, who had one hand behind his back,
sat down in a chair near the door. When he had done so, he stooped to
lay down his hat and stick, which he placed on the floor, behind a
sofa.

“If I’m in the way, Fittleworth——” began Norwood.

“Not at all,” broke in the Chief Constable; “don’t let us disturb
you.”

Canon Fittleworth sat down again, wiped his pince-nez with his
handkerchief, and adjusted them on his nose, and said, addressing the
Major:

“Well now, Major, I don’t know the purpose of your visit, but can only
presume you have some news to impart. Is it about my late cousin?”

“Yes, it is—something you ought to know.”

“In that case,” said the Canon, “Mr. Norwood will be interested too.”

Norwood nodded his head slightly, and said in his judicial manner:

“Naturally. My business with the unhappy affair ended, of course, with
the verdict that was returned. But, as a private individual, I may be
allowed some curiosity. Is there anything fresh, Major?”

“There is,” said the Chief Constable, but addressing his remarks to
the Canon as he spoke. “Detective-Sergeant Colson, as you know, has
had the case in hand, and I’m going to ask you to let him tell you in
his own way.”

“Very well,” said the Canon to Colson, “we shall be pleased to hear
you.”

Colson’s face flushed slightly; he glanced round the room, and finally
fixed his gaze on Canon Fittleworth. It was some moments before he
began—the Chief Constable had even to say to him:

“Go on, Colson.”

“Well, sir,” said Colson, addressing the Canon, and never looking at
anyone else, “this has not been an easy case at all, and I don’t mind
confessing that I’ve blundered considerably.”

“You’ve done your best, sergeant, I’m sure. And no man can do more.”

It was Norwood who spoke, but Colson took no notice of him. He only
seemed to be aware of Canon Fittleworth’s presence. He went on:

“My initial mistake, which led to others, was in taking it for granted
that robbery was the motive for the murder—I allude to the diamonds.
There were three persons who came under suspicion—there were ugly
facts against each of them, especially as one of them was possessed of
cigars of the same brand as those which you smoke, sir. And, in spite
of the band being changed—or, rather, because of it—we felt quite sure
that this individual was our man.”

“What do you mean by the cigar band being changed?” asked Norwood.

But the detective never removed his eyes from the Canon.

“Yes—it was changed,” he said. “I’ll come to that later on. Well, as I
was saying, these three men were cleared of all complicity with the
crime. As for your cigars, Canon Fittleworth”—and he took a paper from
his pocket—“I have a list here of all the persons to whom you gave any
of those particular cigars, and I am satisfied that not one of them
committed the murder, or knew anything about it.”

“I’m very glad to hear that,” said the Canon, a little uncomfortably,
for the detective’s fixed gaze was beginning to fascinate him
strangely.

“It’s true,” went on Colson. “Well, the time came when I dismissed
from my mind the idea that the robbery of the diamonds was the motive.
I had to begin all over again. And now, Canon Fittleworth, I want to
tell you how I imagine in my own mind that your cousin was done to
death.”

“Do you _know_?”

“I said ‘imagine,’ sir. Few people have ever witnessed the actual
committal of a murder. Mr. Templeton, I think, was killed because he
was a very foolish man. I would go so far as to say that he probably
brought it on himself.”

“But——” began the Canon.

“Please, sir,” said the detective, holding up his hand, “let me tell
my story in my own way. I want you to follow your cousin’s movements
in your mind from the time he left this house on the Saturday night.”

“This is all imagination, I think you said?” asked Francis Norwood.

“This is all imagination, yes. But imagination often helps to
reconstruct a crime. Well, sir, he left your house to keep an
appointment.”

“With whom?” asked the Canon.

“Ah,” replied Colson, “there is no one to tell us that. There were no
witnesses, we will suppose. Imagination, sir! He kept the appointment
then. In Frattenbury. As this is imagination, we will call the person
with whom he had an appointment ‘Mr. Blank.’ The end of this
appointment was, that he and ‘Mr. Blank’ walked back together to Marsh
Quay.”

“Why?” asked the Canon.

“Probably—for I don’t know—because your cousin asked him to go,” said
Colson. “I told you he was a very foolish man. I believe he had faced
many dangers in the course of his life, but he was never in so much
danger as when he took that walk back to his yacht. Shall I tell you
the way the two men went? Yes? Imagination, remember, sir! Well, they
didn’t start along the well-lighted South Street. They went down the
parallel street—only two lamps in it, sir—and hardly a soul there at
that time of night. Then they went on to the Canal Basin—‘Mr. Blank’
had chosen the route—turned sharply to the right, crossed the main
road, and took the field path leading to Marsh Quay.

“When they reached the shore your cousin pulled ‘Mr. Blank’ out to the
yacht in his dinghy. ‘Mr. Blank’ was smoking a cigar at the time—or
lighted it when he got on board the yacht.”

“Why do you imagine that my cousin took him on board?”

“My fancy, sir, if you like. Let us say that there was something on
board which your cousin had promised to show ‘Mr. Blank’—or to give to
him. And as soon as he produced it, ‘Mr. Blank,’ who, I think, must
have armed himself with a weapon for the purpose, killed your cousin.”

“But why——”

“Stop a moment, sir. Hear me out. ‘Mr. Blank,’ who had not noticed
that the band had dropped off his cigar, very quickly relieved your
cousin of any papers he had on him—we will imagine there was a reason
for this—then he rowed ashore in the dinghy and did a very curious
thing—it puzzled my imagination—at first. But I thought out a reason
for it. He got hold of a canoe and took the dinghy back to the yacht
again, making her fast, and finally paddled himself to shore in the
canoe and walked back to Frattenbury, where he let himself into his
house before, we will imagine, the theatrical performance at the Town
Hall was quite over. Well, sir, _that’s_ my theory of how your cousin
was murdered.”

He paused. The Chief Constable and the superintendent sat like two
statues. Francis Norwood leaned a little forward in his chair, and
remarked, with a touch of sarcasm:

“A very lucid story, sergeant. I hope you may be successful in
tracking down this ‘Mr. Blank.’”

But, again ignoring the coroner, Colson went on—to the Canon:

“What do you think of it, sir?”

“I don’t know what to think. It’s so very strange. But, to confine
ourselves to your definition, can you imagine the motive?”

“Yes, sir,” replied Colson, very quietly. “I think I can.”

“What was it?”

“Something that the law would call by a very ugly name—‘blackmail.’
That’s what I think, sir.”

“Blackmail!—this ‘Mr. Blank’?”

“No, sir. Mr. Templeton!”

“My cousin a blackmailer!” exclaimed Canon Fittleworth.
“Preposterous!”

“I said that’s what the law would call him, sir. Please—let me go on.
I haven’t quite finished. Let me imagine something further.”

For the first time since he had begun to speak, he took his eyes off
the Canon, and gave a rapid glance at Superintendent Norton. Then he
looked at the Canon again.

“What I am about to imagine now,” he said slowly, “is first that the
Dean gave ‘Mr. Blank’ one of the Canon’s cigars, secondly that ‘Mr.
Blank’ was a left-handed man, and thirdly that he made one fatal
mistake—he left his walking-stick in the dinghy—and this is it!”

He lifted the walking-stick, suddenly, from behind the sofa and held
it out to the Canon. Then he turned in a flash, and sprang across the
room.

“Mr. Norwood, I arrest you for the murder of Reginald Templeton.”

There was a flash of steel and a click. Francis Norwood, who had risen
to his feet when Colson had darted towards him, stood there, the
handcuffs on his wrist.

“Damn you!” he exclaimed, for once losing his frigidity. “What do you
mean? That isn’t my stick. I had one like it, it is true, but I know
that isn’t mine—I——”

“Norwood,” broke in the Chief Constable sternly, “it is my duty to
warn you that anything you say will be taken down and may be given in
evidence.”

“It _is_ your stick,” said Colson gravely. “Your housekeeper
recognised it this evening. I’ve had it from the first. The one you
removed from the dinghy the next night was a dummy. I put it there.”

The astonished Canon looked from one to the other, and exclaimed to
Major Renshaw:

“Is this—is this extraordinary action countenanced by _you_, Major?”

“I fear it is, Canon,” replied Major Renshaw. “Knowing what we do—and
there is a great deal more—I have no option in the matter.”

“But this is terrible—terrible!”

Francis Norwood, still deadly pale, recovered a little from the shock.

“This is unpardonable of you, Major Renshaw. I demand an explanation.”

“Colson will give you one, Mr. Norwood. But I fear it will not help
you.”

He nodded to the detective, who opened the door. A thin, white-faced,
emaciated man came into the room. Norwood regarded him with horror.

“Ezra Grice!” he exclaimed in a low voice. “I—I thought he was dead!”

“I know you did,” said Colson, “or you wouldn’t have been so eager to
help with that advertisement. Shall I ask Grice to tell his story?”

“No—no,” said the lawyer. “No—yes—I don’t care if he does. It’s all a
pack of lies, and he can’t prove anything.”

“It doesn’t matter whether he can or not,” said Colson. “I haven’t
arrested you because of something you did twenty years ago. You are
charged with murder—not embezzlement. May I go on, sir?” he asked the
Chief Constable.

“It is irregular, Colson,” said the Major stiffly.

“I should very much like to know more,” put in the bewildered Canon.
“I think I have a right to ask. You’ve arrested one of my friends in
my own house—charged with the murder of my cousin. Norwood,” and he
went up to the lawyer, “won’t you tell me you didn’t do this awful
thing? I can’t believe it!”

“You’ve heard what Major Renshaw said,” replied Norwood. “Anything I
say may incriminate me. I have no desire to discuss the matter further
at this point.”

“We owe you a further explanation, Canon, as you say,” remarked the
Chief Constable, “and with your permission, Colson shall remain—and
Mr. Grice.”

The Canon nodded.

“Thank you,” he said. “They may stay.”

“Come!” said the superintendent. Between him and the Chief Constable
the coroner walked out of the room, and a motor was heard a few
moments later. Canon Fittleworth sat down and buried his head in his
hands. Presently he said:

“I’m thankful my wife and daughter are not at home.”

“It wouldn’t have happened here, sir, if they had been, I assure you.
You told me, you know, that you were alone.”

The Canon nodded.

“Go on,” he said. “I want to hear it all—poor Reginald!”

“It’s a long story, sir, but I’ll try to make it as short as possible.
The first idea that set me on the right track was that the murderer
was a left-handed man. I found out that Mr. Templeton did not walk
with a stick—I mean, didn’t put the point to the ground. There were
square tracks of the stick’s ferrule on the path to Marsh Quay, on the
left side as you go out.”

“But what made you suspect the stick had anything to do with it?”

Colson told him how the dummy one had been removed on the night after
the murder, and then went on.

“I was on the look-out for a left-handed man, and one day I saw Mr.
Norwood draw a cork from a bottle. He held the bottle with his right
hand and drew it with his left. It seemed preposterous, but when I
noticed him another day walking down the street with a stick in his
left hand it set me thinking. I got the report of the inquest, and
studied it carefully, noting all the coroner’s questions. And it
seemed to me that he was particularly anxious to find out whether
anyone had an idea as to your cousin’s appointment. Also, when Jim
Webb mentioned that he had read the address on the letter to you, he
questioned him narrowly as to whether he had read any other addresses.
Then he must have felt secure until you produced that cigar band. I
thought for a long time that Proctor had changed it, but when I found
he hadn’t, I knew it could only have been the coroner himself.”

“Why?”

“There were several old bands off cigars that had been smoked by
Grayson, lying in the grate. Don’t you remember that the coroner
dropped some papers in the grate, and stooped down to get them? So did
Proctor. That’s why I suspected him first. Afterwards I saw it all.
While that cigar band was passing round the jury, the coroner picked
up one from the grate and changed it. Clever! But it was a foolish
thing to do, as it turned out.

“You told me you gave a dozen of your cigars to the Dean. He
remembered that when Norwood was dining with him afterwards—just a day
or two before the murder—he smoked one of them, and liked it so much
that the Dean gave him a couple, which he put in his case.

“Well, in Norwood’s hall, when I went to see him one day, I noticed
several queer photographs and old weapons—three or four small daggers
among them—hanging on the wall. Then Mr. Crosby was a great help; he
put me on the track of finding Ezra Grice. There was a letter partly
blotted on Mr. Templeton’s blotting-pad that gave us the clue. And Mr.
Crosby also found out the beginning of the whole story, and
accidentally discovered that the coroner was speculating heavily—and
that had a lot to do with things. He wanted money.”

“Dear me,” said the Canon. “I imagined him to be a wealthy man.”

“So did most people, sir, but after what we heard we made inquiries,
and found out a lot about him. And I assure you that even if I hadn’t
arrested him to-night, he’d very soon have been in the bankruptcy
court.”

“You astonish me.”

“It’s true, sir. Now, when our friend Ezra Grice here arrived from
South Africa, he solved the rest of the mystery. We have his sworn
statement. Will you tell the Canon, Mr. Grice?”

Grice, who had not spoken hitherto, said:

“Yes, I will. Where shall I begin?”

“At the beginning—twenty years ago.”

“You’ll find it a strange story, sir,” said Colson. “And it will
explain why I said the law would have called your cousin a
blackmailer.”



CHAPTER XXI

Final Solution of the Problem

It was an extraordinary story that Ezra Grice had to tell. Briefly,
the first part of it amounted to this. Twenty years ago he had been
clerk in Francis Norwood’s office. Norwood, at that time, had a
partner, a young married man named Forbes. Forbes was tried on a
charge of embezzlement, and Grice was a witness for the prosecution.
But Grice was deeply involved himself. Addicted to betting, he had
helped himself to the firm’s money—falsifying accounts.

Just before the trial commenced he made a discovery—a discovery that
would have proved Forbes an innocent man. And the discovery he made
was that Norwood himself, who had been speculating heavily, had
embezzled the money from two clients—and not Forbes at all. Knowing
this, he went into Norwood’s private office and accused him of the
crime.

But Norwood turned the tables on him. To Grice’s horror, he calmly
produced proofs of the clerk’s defalcations, and threatened to give
him in charge instantly.

“And who is going to believe you _then_?” he asked calmly. “Do you
think they’ll take the word of a thief against mine?”

Grice, who had no proofs in his possession at the time, but had only
arrived at his conclusions by a study of accounts and documents
passing through his hands, was staggered. He felt he had matched
himself unwisely against the astute lawyer—who was quick to see this.

“Very well,” Norwood had said, “you can take your choice. Either I
send for a policeman at once, or you withdraw what you say, and give
your evidence to-morrow. Which is it to be? I give you five minutes to
decide.”

Ezra Grice decided before the five minutes were up. He caved in,
abjectly. As soon as the trial was over, and Forbes was sentenced,
Norwood coolly told him that unless he left Frattenbury at once and
never returned, he would prosecute him for theft.

“And if I say what I know?” asked Grice.

“They won’t believe you if you do; and if they do believe you, then
you’ll be prosecuted for perjury as well.”

Again the wretched clerk gave in. But before he left the office that
very day he made a fresh discovery—a paper which Norwood had left out
of his safe that absolutely incriminated him. He was half inclined to
make use of this paper and have his revenge on the wily lawyer, but
fear got the better of him. However, when he left Frattenbury the next
day he took this paper with him and kept it carefully.

He went out to South Africa and led a roving life for years keeping
honest all the time. He had had one great fright, and that was enough
for him. He always kept the incriminating paper; he was in dread that
perhaps one day his crime might follow him, and he looked upon it as a
weapon of defence in case he ever met Norwood again. Finally, as Sir
James Perrivale had said, he joined Reginald Templeton in an
exploration in the interior.

“It was a long time,” he went on to the Canon, “before I told Mr.
Templeton my story—and he was the only man to whom I ever told it
before the police took it down here. I happened to mention Frattenbury
one day, and he questioned me, but I didn’t let him know anything
then. However, I saw he knew something about the Forbes case and was
interested in it.

“Then he saved my life. I got to like him. He was a queer man, but
very kind to me always. I shall never forget how he stood by me on
that awful journey before we struck Sir James Perrivale’s camp. My arm
was broken and I was down with fever. He’d help to carry the stretcher
himself—miles at a time.

“I asked him point-blank one day if he was interested in Forbes. He
only answered ‘Yes.’ Then I said, ‘Would it be any use to you to know
he was innocent of that charge?’ I shan’t forget what he said. He
questioned me eagerly and I told him all about it. Then he said,
‘Thank God for this, Grice. Forbes died long ago; but he’s left a
daughter—and, by God, that scoundrel Norwood shall make it up to her!’

“He made me promise I’d go back to England with him—if we ever came
through—and help him expose Norwood—or, rather, he said he was not
going to expose him—he’d got a better card to play than that. But it
seemed that I wasn’t going to get back to England. They all thought me
dying when we got to the camp. Mr. Templeton had to go on, but before
he left he wrote down my statement which I signed before witnesses,
and asked me to give him that paper I had on me. Of course I did, and
then he told me what he was going to do. I can hear him saying it now.

“‘You’ll have your revenge on Norwood,’ he said. ‘And it’s a revenge
that will touch him to the quick on his sorest point. Forbes is dead,
and we can’t help him. And his wife is dead. But there’s her daughter.
If I were to give Norwood into the hands of the law there’d be no
recompense for _her_. But, by God, there _shall_ be! As soon as I get
back to the old country I shall write to Norwood, tell him what I
know, and offer him choice between exposure and ten thousand pounds.’”

“That is where the blackmail comes in, sir,” interposed Colson
quietly. “And I don’t know that I wouldn’t justify it—but the law
wouldn’t.”

“Go on, please,” said the Canon to Grice.

“Well, sir, he went on to say that if he got this sum out of Norwood
he should settle it on Forbes’s daughter—not telling her where it came
from, and not letting her know about her father. He said she was only
a child at the time—well, I knew that; I’ve often seen her here—and
that she had been brought up in ignorance of her father’s crime.”

“I think I know who she was,” murmured the Canon. “That accounts for
those strange impressions of having been here before—and recognising
Norwood. Yes?”

Ezra Grice finished the story, and the detective took up the threads.

“Now do you see, sir?” he asked. “Mr. Templeton evidently carried out
his threat and wrote to Norwood on his return. Then he made an
appointment with him. He wrote saying he was prepared to hand over
Grice’s confession and proofs in exchange for the money. Norwood must
have been in a terrible dilemma. He must get those proofs in any case;
it would mean utter ruin to him if he was once exposed. But he hadn’t
the money to buy them. Whether or not he meant to bluff your cousin
remains to be seen. Anyhow, he made the appointment, and sent his
domestics to the performance at the Town Hall that night—I’ve found
out that—in order to be alone when Templeton called.”

“But why go back to Marsh Quay with him?” asked the Canon.

“Don’t you see, sir? I think we can guess. Templeton hadn’t got the
confession and proofs on him. He made a mistake by being too careful.
You told us he said he was very likely going to spend a few nights
here. Very well. That particular night he wasn’t prepared to hand them
over. The coroner had probably not committed himself, even by a
typewritten, unsigned letter. And he knew he hadn’t the money.”

“What _did_ he do, then?” asked the Canon.

“Probably pretended that he _had_ got it, and induced Templeton to
give him the proofs that night. By this time he had made up his mind
that he _must_ have them—in any case. And I think he took that dagger,
or whatever it was, with him—ready to take the biggest risk of all.
Which we know he did!”

Canon Fittleworth sat for a few minutes in silence. Then he said:

“Thank you, Sergeant Colson, and thank you also, Mr. Grice. The whole
affair has been terrible—very terrible. I want time to think it over.
I must say, however, Colson, that you are a very clever man to have
found out all this.”

“Thank you, sir. I did my best. And someone helped me very much. Good
night, sir. I’m very sorry all this has happened.”

Colson and Ezra Grice went out, leaving the Canon seated in his chair
gazing at the fire, his mind greatly agitated.


At the police station that night Norwood asked to be provided with
writing materials. They did so.

He smiled sardonically while they searched him and took away a
penknife and a pair of pocket nail-scissors.

But in the morning they found him hanging to the bar of the
window—they have out-of-date cells in Frattenbury—his braces
substituted for the rope that he would have eventually earned. And on
the table was a characteristic document:

  I am anxious to assist my successor, though I fancy he will have no
  trouble in persuading the jury as to the verdict. I am a ruined man,
  with no more use for the world. Sergeant Colson’s “imagination” is
  fairly correct. I will only add that I persuaded Templeton I had the
  money. He had demanded cash. I showed him what appeared to be a roll
  of notes—tissue-paper with some genuine ones at the top. I also told
  him that unless he gave me what Ezra Grice has probably described
  that night, I should abscond—with the ten thousand pounds on me. He
  made a mistake in not bringing what he had for sale—he was too
  cautious. It was the dagger hanging in my hall when I put my coat on
  that suggested I might have to take a desperate step. I took it with
  me. Templeton produced what I wanted from the locker. Then he was
  fool enough to examine the roll of notes I had laid on the table.
  That was the end of it. I took the contents of his pockets to make
  sure in case he had anything with my name on it. I desire to say
  that I regret what I did, but I was desperate that night. That is
  all.


“Mr. Crosby,” said the Canon the following day—the lawyer had come
down to Frattenbury on receipt of a wire from the police—“I want to
ask you something.”

“What is it?”

“This girl, Winifred Cotterill—or Forbes, as we must call her now. If
there had been a trial, I suppose everything would have come out?”

“About her father? Certainly. Ezra Grice would have given evidence,
and the girl must have guessed.”

“I thought so. As it is, however, she has never heard about her
father’s sufferings. Poor fellow, what he must have gone through! The
matter, you tell me, rests in your hands. What are you going to do
about it? Shall you tell her the whole story?”

The lawyer thought for a minute or two, and replied shortly:

“I don’t know, Canon Fittleworth. That is a question I shall have to
consider. I haven’t made up my mind yet.”


The End



TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

This transcription follows the text of the 1924 edition published by
Edward J. Clode, Inc., with the exception of the following changes,
made to correct what are believed to be unambiguous errors.

 * “mighn’t” has been changed to “mightn’t” (Chapter IV).
 * “inquistive” has been changed to “inquisitive” (Chapter VI).
 * “adusted” has been changed to “adjusted” (Chapter VIII).
 * “unkown” has been changed to “unknown” (Chapter IX).
 * “musn’t” has been changed to “mustn’t” (Chapter IX).
 * “Colonel Fittleworth” has been changed to “Canon Fittleworth”
   (Chapter XI).
 * “maner” has been changed to “manner” (Chapter XI).
 * “respecable” has been changed to “respectable” (Chapter XI).
 * “Birchnal” has been changed to “Birchnall” (Chapter XII).
 * Six occurrences of mismatched quotation marks have been repaired.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TEMPLETON CASE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


