The Project Gutenberg eBook of Fashions for men, and The swan
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Fashions for men, and The swan
        Two plays by Franz Molnar

Author: Ferenc Molnár

Translator: Benjamin F. Glazer

Release date: March 13, 2025 [eBook #75610]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: Boni and Liveright, 1921

Credits: Steven desJardins and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was produced from scanned images of public domain material from the Google Books project.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FASHIONS FOR MEN, AND THE SWAN ***





                             FASHIONS FOR MEN
                                 THE SWAN

                              [Illustration]




                             FASHIONS FOR MEN

                                   AND

                                 THE SWAN

                               TWO PLAYS BY
                               FRANZ MOLNAR
                           _Author of “Liliom”_

                     English Texts by Benjamin Glazer

                            BONI AND LIVERIGHT
                           PUBLISHERS NEW YORK




FASHIONS FOR MEN

THE SWAN


                   _English Texts Copyright, 1922, by_
                          BENJAMIN GLAZER, N. Y.

                   _German Texts, Copyright, 1921, by_
                             M. BARD, VIENNA.

_CAUTION_—All persons are hereby warned that the plays published in
this volume are fully protected under the copyright laws of the United
States and all foreign countries, and are subject to royalty, and anyone
presenting any of said plays without the consent of the Author or his
recognized agents, will be liable to the penalties by law provided.
Applications for the acting rights of “Fashions for Men” must be made to
the Modern Theatre Corporation, 17 East 45th Street, New York City.

                _Printed in the United States of America_

                    _First printing, November, 1922._
                    _Second printing, November, 1923._
                    _Third printing, February, 1924._
                      _Fourth printing, May, 1924._
                    _Fifth printing, November, 1924._

As originally produced by Maurice S. Revnes, November, 1922, New York
City.

_CAST OF CHARACTERS_

(In the order of their appearance)

    _Peter Juhasz_             O. P. Heggie
    _Adele, his wife_          Beth Merrill
    _Aristocratic Lady_        Edythe Tressider
    _Oscar_                    Clarke Silvernail
    _Unassuming Lady_          Frances Goodrich
    _Philip_                   Frank Peters
    _Young Gentleman_          Fred Burton
    _Paula_                    Helen Gahagan
    _Adolf_                    George Frenger
    _The Count_                Edwin Nicander
    _Delivery Boy_             James Hagen
    _Domokos_                  George Frenger
    _Santha_                   Fred Barton
    _Mate_                     Charles Ellis
    _Maid_                     Sedonia Elin
    _Thorough Young Lady_      Katherine Haden
    _Dissatisfied Lady_        Frances Goodrich
    _Nervous Gentleman_        John Rogers
    _Old Gentleman_            James Hagen
    _Patient Lady_             Sedonia Elin
    _Cabman_                   George Frenger

                          _Staged by_ MR. GLAZER
                      _Settings by_ SHELDON K. VIELE
                       _Stage Manager_ JAMES HAGEN

                  _Scenery painted by_ ROBERT W. BERGMAN
                      _Costumes by_ ALINE BERNSTEIN
                    _Act 1, built by_ THEODORE REISIG
                    _Act 2, built by_ SAMUEL FRIEDMAN

                   _General Manager_ JOHN PETER TOOHEY




FASHIONS FOR MEN

A COMEDY IN THREE ACTS

By FRANZ MOLNAR

English text by Benjamin Glazer




PERSONS


    PETER JUHASZ
    ADELE, _his wife_.
    PAULA
    OSCAR
    PHILIP
    THE COUNT
    MATE
    DOMOKOS
    SANTHA
    ADOLF
    A DELIVERY BOY
    A CABMAN
    THE ARISTOCRATIC LADY
    THE UNASSUMING LADY
    THE INSIGNIFICANT LADY
    THE DISSATISFIED LADY
    THE PATIENT LADY
    THE THOROUGH YOUNG LADY
    THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN
    THE OLD GENTLEMAN
    THE NERVOUS GENTLEMAN




ACT ONE




ACT ONE


    SCENE—_A little shop. Down left is the display window; up left
    the entrance from the street; between the two a cashier’s desk
    with a cash register upon it. There is a counter along the back
    wall and another along the right wall with shelves behind them
    and, over them, a little balcony._

    _A broad space between the counters leads through an archway up
    right to a rear room of the establishment. Before the window
    down left stands a table, displaying open boxes of cravats,
    suspenders, ladies’ girdles, colored scarfs and bottles of
    perfume. Near it stands a rack of walking-sticks. There are two
    stools in front of each counter._

    _It is evening. ADELE sits behind the cashier’s desk. OSCAR
    stands behind the counter at back speaking in low tones to the
    UNASSUMING LADY, who sits on a stool facing him across a heap
    of merchandise on the counter. JUHASZ stands in front of the
    counter at right, waiting on the ARISTOCRATIC LADY, who sits on
    one of the stools with an assortment of summer-weight material
    for blouses before her._

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—If I remember rightly, Mr. Juhasz, I saw some of this
on Countess Hohensperg at Tatralomnicz.

JUHASZ—That may be. I must look it up in the book. [_To ADELE._] Tell me,
dear. [_Shows her the material._] Is this the same Agreable we sold to
the Countess Hohensperg a few months ago?

ADELE—It may be. I am not sure.

OSCAR—[_To the UNASSUMING LADY._] Excuse me, madame. [_Loudly to JUHASZ._]
Yes, the Countess Hohensperg got some of that....

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—I thought so.

OSCAR—Yes, madame, this Chatterton Agreable comes in twelve different
colors. The countess took five.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—Then, of course, I can’t consider it. I am really sorry
to give you so much trouble, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—But it is no trouble at all.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—You are perfectly charming, Mr. Juhasz. Just as if you
had been born to cater to the caprices of women. You never lose patience——

JUHASZ—[_Clearing away the materials._] But that’s what we are here for,
madame.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_Rummaging through the materials._] This is nice,
but it isn’t becoming to me. This is for a bigger woman ... this for a
thinner woman ... this is too youthful ... and this is too old. This is
nice, but it’s a bit loud ... and this is too dull. Now this is very nice
indeed, but Countess Hohensperg has it. So it is out of the question.

JUHASZ—Suppose we let the Agreable go, and look at some Biarritz instead.
The fact is, I consider Biarritz a much better grade. It is kept back
here. Will you step this way, or shall I bring it out to you here?

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_Rises._] I wouldn’t think of putting you to so much
trouble. You have turned out half your stock for me already. [_Turns to
ADELE._] Your wife must be impatient to go home.

ADELE—Not at all.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—It’s past seven. You are usually closed by this time.

ADELE—Oh, we are very glad to serve you. [_Points to OSCAR._] There, you
see ... and there is still another customer in there.

OSCAR—[_Has approached JUHASZ._] The lady heard us mention the Agreable
that Countess Hohensperg——

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—Quite out of the question!

OSCAR—No, no—[_Low._] The lady heard us talking about it [_meantime
JUHASZ has gone over to the UNASSUMING LADY_] and wants to have a look
at it. [_Takes the material with a pitying smile._] Thank you. She’s from
a different social sphere.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—One would never believe that people could be such apes.

JUHASZ—[_In the archway._] If you will step this way, please.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—I shan’t detain him much longer, Mrs. Juhasz. [_JUHASZ
lets her past him, then follows her off through the archway._]

UNASSUMING LADY—I’ll take this for the sixth.

OSCAR—[_Counting the patterns._] One, two, three, four, five and the
Agreable makes six.

UNASSUMING LADY—Will it take long?

OSCAR—No, indeed, madame. We know that madame goes to Lelle on the
twentieth, and from there to Lake Pusztaban, and later to Post
Berettyo—Saint Peter. [_The UNASSUMING LADY rises._] Is there anything
else I can show you? We have just got in some very beautiful girdles.
[_Reaches for a box on the table._]

UNASSUMING LADY—Thank you, but it’s too late now.

OSCAR—But, madame, that’s what we are here for. [_Shows her a bonnet._]
Auto bonnets ... just arrived ... really the newest thing of its kind.

UNASSUMING LADY—[_Takes it in her hand._] I shall be coming in again
toward the end of next week.... How much is this?

OSCAR—May I see? [_Looks at the tag._] Seventy kronen.

UNASSUMING LADY—For this?

OSCAR—It’s the style that costs, madame. We have some cheaper ones ...
some between forty and fifty.

UNASSUMING LADY—Thanks.... Next time I come, perhaps. You have my address?

OSCAR—[_Rapidly._] Forty Nagykorona Street, first floor, apartment two.

UNASSUMING LADY—That’s right. Now please see to it that my things are
delivered on time. Good night.

OSCAR—[_Opens the door for her._] You can rely on us absolutely. Thank
you. Good night. [_She exits. He closes the door behind her and returns
to his counter. As he speaks he clears away the materials, folds up those
he sold and makes notes on the tags._] A couple of evening stars ...
those two ... always popping up just as we are about to close ... and
it’s almost impossible to get rid of them.

ADELE—Philip is still busy with a customer, too.

OSCAR—[_Glances through the archway._] And your husband is just starting
to climb the ladder. [_Looks at his watch._] This is a nice time. [_ADELE
takes her hat out of the lowest drawer of the desk._] What are you doing?

ADELE—Getting my hat.

OSCAR—[_Excitedly._] But, my dear, where do you expect to talk to him?

ADELE—Now don’t get excited.... And I told you before you are not to call
me dear in the shop.

OSCAR—[_With a glance through the archway._] He can’t hear me. He’s up on
the ladder. And no matter if he does hear me to-day. You are not going
home with him, are you?

ADELE—No; I’m only getting my hat.

OSCAR—You settle everything with him right here ... in the shop.

ADELE—All right! All right! [_Takes off her hat._]

OSCAR—[_Excitedly._] I won’t have you go home with him any more.

ADELE—Don’t get so excited. I’ll talk to him right here. But I have to
wait until the customers are gone, haven’t I?

OSCAR—Yes, certainly. [_Nervously resumes his task of clearing the
counter._] Forgive me, dear, but I’m awfully nervous. And no wonder.

ADELE—I’m nervous, too. But I control myself.

OSCAR—I’ll be right near you, and if you need me I’ll come over. The main
thing is to keep cool. Now, of all times, you must be cool.

ADELE—Leave everything to me. If I need you I’ll call you in.

OSCAR—That’s right! That’s right! There’s only one thing I want to
impress upon you. No scandal.

ADELE—He’d never make a scandal.

OSCAR—And you have no business going to his house after this. When you
leave here to-day there is only one place for you to go: your mother’s
house.

ADELE—Now, dear, you’re getting excited again.

OSCAR—How can you expect me to be calm? I stand at the turning point of
my life. And I’m subject to heart attacks. It runs in our family. I have
to be very careful.... And yet, my God ... [_stops his work_] when I
think that to-night ... this ordinary spring night ... this commonplace
Thursday evening ... you are to be mine ... definitely and forever ...
mine ... body and soul.... Come here!

ADELE—Be careful.

OSCAR—Come here, come here!

ADELE—[_Goes to him._] There now, you are getting all excited again.

OSCAR—Only your hand, your hand ... for a moment.

ADELE—But Oscar!

OSCAR—Your hand! You know I’ve got heart trouble! [_She gives him her
hand. He takes it, looks cautiously through the archway, then speaks,
softly but passionately._] Mine! My own wife! Before all the world! And
together we begin a new and wonderful life. To-night I lead you forth
from your prison.... Don’t take your hand away! I won’t have you take
your hand away!

ADELE—[_Leaves him; returns to her desk._] You must behave yourself,
Oscar, or you’ll make me nervous, too.

OSCAR—Your hand, your hand, your mouth....

ADELE—But, Oscar!... You know I need all my wits just now. Clear away
that Zephir.

OSCAR—Clear away, clear away! Now, when I want to explode, I must clear
a lot of Zephir away! [_Gazes at her adoringly._] When I think, you
sweet, slender, white.... [_He looks quickly toward the archway, as if
he heard something there. His voice changes suddenly._] Forty Nagykorona
Street, apartment two. [_He writes on a tag._] First floor. Madame Aurel
Szelenyi. [_PHILIP and the YOUNG GENTLEMAN enter through the archway._]

PHILIP—This way, Baron. [_Comes in before him._]

YOUNG GENTLEMAN—Can you still send it to-day?

PHILIP—[_At the cashier’s desk._] If you must have it, sir.

YOUNG GENTLEMAN—[_At the cashier’s desk._] As soon as you can, please.

PHILIP—[_To ADELE._] Three hundred and eighty-eight kronen. [_The YOUNG
GENTLEMAN gives her a banknote._]

ADELE—[_Rings the cash register, makes change._] Three hundred and
eighty-eight ... twelve ... makes four hundred. Thank you, sir.

YOUNG GENTLEMAN—You have the address?

OSCAR—[_In a sing-song tone._] Thirty-two Museum Street, second floor.

YOUNG GENTLEMAN—[_Staring in surprise at OSCAR._] That’s right. Good day.

OSCAR—[_Hurries to open the door for him._] Good night, sir.

YOUNG GENTLEMAN—Good night. [_He exits, pauses a moment outside the
window, then passes on._]

PHILIP—Thank you, sir. Good night. [_A brief pause._]

OSCAR—Now if that pest of a woman would only go.... [_To PHILIP._]
Philip, clear those rags away, will you? [_He points to the materials on
the counter at right. PHILIP obeys._]

ADELE—Didn’t I hear Philip say he had a ticket for Lohengrin to-night?

OSCAR—[_As he goes up toward the archway._] For what?

ADELE—For the opera.

PHILIP—[_Already working at the counter._] That makes no difference.

OSCAR—It doesn’t begin till seven-thirty. [_He exits through the
archway. There is a brief pause._]

PHILIP—It begins at seven, but it doesn’t matter.

ADELE—Leave that stuff, Philip, and run along to your opera.

PHILIP—Oh, it’s all the same to me now. I’ve been to Lohengrin sixteen
times and was late every time. To-night I’ll be late for the seventeenth
time.

ADELE—Leave that, then, and go, why don’t you?

PHILIP—Oh, I might as well be an hour late now. I know all of Lohengrin
by heart. The only reason I accept tickets for it any more is because
I’ve never succeeded in seeing the beginning. The part where the swan
comes on the stage, pulling Lohengrin in a boat. I’d like to see that
just once. But it’s too late now. The swan’s all through by this time,
and has gone home for his supper. [_Continues to fold and put away the
materials._]

ADELE—My husband will clear that away. Don’t be so obstinate.

PHILIP—You seem very eager to get rid of me to-night.

ADELE—I don’t know what makes you think that.

PHILIP—Just things I’ve noticed.

ADELE—What have you noticed?

PHILIP—Maybe I had better keep my mouth shut.

ADELE—That’s always a good idea. And yet, as long as you mentioned it——

PHILIP—Please, please.... I don’t want to know. Just leave me out of it.

ADELE—Out of what?

PHILIP—Out of what’s going on around here. I’m just a lonesome old man——

ADELE—You are a hateful old man. [_Wrathfully._] You hate Oscar because
he is the heart and soul of the business, because he is young, and
clever, and has nice manners, and knows the business better than you do,
and because the customers like him better. You are jealous of him.

PHILIP—I consider Mr. Oscar a very ordinary young man.

ADELE—And I admire his type very much!

PHILIP—His kind must live, too, I suppose. [_JUHASZ and the ARISTOCRATIC
LADY enter through the archway._]

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—No, your Biarritz won’t do. I wonder you keep that
grade of material at all.

JUHASZ—Perhaps madame will be good enough to come in again next week. We
are expecting an entirely new lot from Vienna. We are certain to find
something you like.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_Goes to the cashier’s desk._] Your patience is
endless, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—Patience is a merchant’s first duty.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—You are an angel. A perfect angel! [_To ADELE._] I
hope you don’t mind my paying your husband compliments.

ADELE—Indeed, no.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—I daresay you are used to it. Everybody adores Mr.
Juhasz.

ADELE—Oh, madame!

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—You are a very fortunate young woman to have such a
husband.

JUHASZ—It’s I who am fortunate, madame, to have such a devoted little
wife. The poor darling sits here every day from early morning till late
at night.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—Has the count been here lately?

ADELE—Our benefactor?

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—The guardian angel of the establishment.

JUHASZ—He was here the day before yesterday.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—How is he?

ADELE—In love with my husband.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—You mustn’t joke about that, young lady. Everybody
loves your husband but his heart is for you alone. Good night, Mr.
Angel.... I shall look at that Biarritz again in the daylight and that
... what do you call it ... too.

PHILIP—[_Angry, but sweetly._] Agreable.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—Agreable. Well, good night.

ADELE AND JUHASZ—[_Simultaneously._] Good night. [_The ARISTOCRATIC LADY
exits._]

JUHASZ—[_Closing the door._] Why didn’t you say good night, Philip?

PHILIP—[_Resentfully._] Good night, madame.

JUHASZ—Well, well. [_To ADELE._] What a handsome woman she is!

PHILIP—She’s been handsome a long time now. And she owes more than she’s
worth. You are the only merchant in town who gives her credit any more.
You just let her haul the stuff out of here as if it didn’t cost you
anything.

JUHASZ—What can she do, poor woman? She’s got to keep up her social
position.

PHILIP—But not with your money.

JUHASZ—Aristocratic poverty is the bitterest kind. I haven’t the heart to
refuse her.

ADELE—Philip is in a temper because he has missed the swan again.

JUHASZ—[_Looks at his watch._] Did you have a ticket for Lohengrin again?

PHILIP—Yes, and I’ve still got it.

JUHASZ—Why didn’t you tell me? You know I’d have let you off at
six-thirty. That really makes me angry. I told you long ago——

PHILIP—Because you’re good-hearted there’s no need for me to——

JUHASZ—There goes my heart again. You all talk about my heart as if it
were some prima donna.... You leave my heart alone.

PHILIP—[_Mocking the ARISTOCRATIC LADY’S tone._] Everybody adores Mr.
Juhasz!

JUHASZ—Go on now. What are you waiting for?

PHILIP—Thanks, but I shan’t go at all to-night. [_He exits through the
archway. There is a pause._]

JUHASZ—What’s wrong with him to-night?

ADELE—I don’t know, and I really don’t care.

JUHASZ—Why, Adele!

ADELE—[_Comes out from behind the desk._] Don’t be angry, Peter. I am a
bit upset to-night. I’ve come to a very important decision ... and I feel
... I must tell you about it to-day.

JUHASZ—My dear child ... I didn’t think you had a care in the world.

ADELE—Yes, I have.... But you are so good ... so much better than anyone
else.... I hardly know how to begin. It’s terribly hard to tell you!

JUHASZ—Hard? To tell me? There, put on your things ... and you can tell
me all about it on the way home. Or while we are at supper.

ADELE—No, Peter, I can’t tell you on the way home ... or at supper
either. This is something I must tell you here.

JUHASZ—Here and nowhere else?

ADELE—Here ... and now.

JUHASZ—Urgent as all that! [_Calls through the archway._] Adolf, we’ll
close up now.

ADELE—You will understand ... when I’ve told you ... that [_PAULA enters
through the archway, a sheaf of letters and invoices in her hand._]

PAULA—May I interrupt a moment, Mrs. Juhasz?

ADELE—Certainly.

PAULA—Semlinger and Weiss have written about those motor robes again ...
the leather-bound ones. They say they are holding two dozen for us.

ADELE—[_Uneasily._] Let me see. [_She takes the letter._]

JUHASZ—Didn’t you answer them last week?

PAULA—Mrs. Juhasz thought we might wait awhile.

ADELE—How dare you say such a thing?

JUHASZ—But, my dear....

PAULA—[_Coldly._] Mrs. Juhasz instructed me not to answer it.

JUHASZ—If Miss Paula says you....

ADELE—I suppose she _can’t_ be mistaken.

PAULA—I usually am not.

ADELE—What do I care about your old motor robes? [_Throws the letter
away._] I have nothing to do with it. [_Walks away from them._]

JUHASZ—[_Picks up the letter._] My wife’s a bit nervous to-night. Write
Semlinger and Weiss, Miss Paula, that we’ll take the whole two dozen.
[_Gives her the letter; looks at his watch._] But do it in the morning.
Go home now. To-morrow is another day.

PAULA—Thanks, Mr. Juhasz, but I don’t like to go home while there is work
unfinished.

JUHASZ—Miss Paula, I’ve warned you before ... you’ll ruin your eyes if
you are not careful.

PAULA—No fear, Mr. Juhasz.... There was something about waterproof coats,
too, in their first letter. I must look it up. [_She exits through the
archway._]

JUHASZ—How thorough she is, how orderly!

ADELE—That’s what she’s paid for. You only see the good side of people.

JUHASZ—I think that must be the only side they show me. [_ADOLF enters
through the archway, carrying a long pole with a hook on the end of it._]
Close up, Adolf; close up. It’s half past seven. [_ADOLF goes to the
door._] Sit down a moment, Adele. [_To ADOLF._] Pull it down. We’ll go
out the back way. [_To ADELE._] You are a bit agitated. [_ADOLF has gone
outside. First he closes the bronze shutter at the window, then he begins
to pull down the iron grating at the door. When it is half way down he is
interrupted._]

COUNT—[_Outside._] Ho, there! Wait a minute! [_He dodges under the half
closed grating and enters._]

  JUHASZ—[_Joyfully._] The count! Good evening,    }
  excellency.                                      }
                                                   }
  COUNT—Good evening! Good evening!                } [_Simultaneously._]
                                                   }
  ADELE—[_Bowing low._] Good evening, your         }
  excellency.                                      }

COUNT—Tell me, do you lock all your customers out like this?

JUHASZ—If we had known, your excellency. [_To ADOLF._] Raise it up.
[_ADOLF raises the grating and exits through the archway._]

COUNT—I’ve come to see about those jockey costumes, Juhasz.

JUHASZ—But they were to be sent by post to-morrow.

COUNT—I know, Juhasz, but I’m driving down to the farm to-night ... and I
want to take one costume with me ... to show to my brother-in-law before
the Vienna races.

JUHASZ—The suits are finished, but I’ll have to telephone the cap-maker
about the caps. Just a moment. [_He hurries off through the archway._]

ADELE—Won’t you sit down, your excellency?

COUNT—Thanks. I’m going in a moment. What’s new?

ADELE—Nothing ... much, your excellency.

COUNT—How’s business?

ADELE—Well....

COUNT—What? Not good?

ADELE—Not as good as it might be.... Your excellency has been so generous
to us.... I feel I ought to tell you frankly ... it’s quite bad.

COUNT—Why?

ADELE—There is no accounting for it. For two years business was splendid,
and now, in the third year, it suddenly stopped. It just won’t go.

COUNT—But my whole family deals here ... and all my friends ... and all
my acquaintances.

ADELE—Oh, yes, your excellency. We have you to thank for everything.
Not only for setting us up in business, but for getting us most of our
customers.

COUNT—I trust that Juhasz isn’t going into debt. [_She nods in the
affirmative._] I daresay he gives his neckties away for nothing. That’s
why you are losing money.

ADELE—He’d give the whole shop away, if it were left to him.

COUNT—He had the same weakness when he worked for me. Anybody could get
anything out of him.

ADELE—It’s largely his fault.

COUNT—And what about that young man you praised to me so highly? He
was supposed to be a genius. A commercial genius. This ... what’s his
name?... Oscar ... wasn’t it?

ADELE—Oh, he does all he can, and so do I, but——

COUNT—And that nice Miss Paula ... she’s an industrious girl, what?

ADELE—Your excellency’s favorite.

COUNT—I am enchanted with her. [_Paula enters through the archway, with
letters in her hand._]

PAULA—[_With a low bow._] Good evening, your excellency.

COUNT—Good evening. I was just talking about you.

PAULA—Very good of you. Excuse me. [_To ADELE._] I was not mistaken, Mrs.
Juhasz. Semlinger and Weiss offered us also twenty waterproof coats. We
have never given them an answer. [_Proffers the letter._]

ADELE—[_Impatiently._] Show it to Mr. Oscar.

PAULA—I did. He referred me to you.

ADELE—[_Crossly._] We don’t want any waterproof coats.

COUNT—Why not? They are very useful things. They keep the rain out.

ADELE—If your excellency would like to order one——

COUNT—Oh, indeed, no! I can’t bear waterproof coats. [_Looks at Paula._]
Miss Paula is smiling.... Doubtless she’s fond of waterproof coats.

PAULA—I beg pardon.

COUNT—Why _did_ you smile then? Just making fun of the old man?

PAULA—Old man?... Oh!

COUNT—Well, not exactly old.

PAULA—I smiled because your excellency has such an aversion for
waterproof coats. But I never thought of you as old.

ADELE—You may go, Miss Paula. [_Paula bows to the count and exits through
the archway._]

COUNTs—[_His glance follows her._] Why are you so severe with that nice
young girl?

ADELE—She is a bit forward.

COUNT—Not at all.

ADELE—She is deceitful. I can’t bear her. Ordinarily she is very glum and
serious, but when your excellency puts your foot in the door she suddenly
becomes brisk and cheerful.

COUNT—Really? I am flattered.

JUHASZ—[_Comes through the archway, carrying a jockey suit of brown silk
striped in green._] I can’t get the cap-maker on the wire. Oscar is
trying again. But here is the jockey suit.

COUNT—[_Adjusts his glass._] Yes, this will do very well. Will you wrap
it up for me, Juhasz? [_Returns the suit to him._]

OSCAR—[_Rushes in through the archway, speaks rapidly, officiously._]
Your excellency, good evening! We are in luck, your excellency. The caps
are finished; he was going to send them to-morrow, but he can send them
at once if your excellency prefers——

COUNT—[_Stares at him in astonishment; turns to JUHASZ._] What does he
say?

JUHASZ—The caps are ready. If your excellency will tell us where to send
them——

COUNT—[_Staring at OSCAR._]—Eh? Yes ... wait a moment. [_PAULA appears in
the archway; he smiles at her._] Yes.

PAULA—Pardon me for interrupting.

OSCAR—[_Officiously._] Why don’t you come in when his excellency speaks
to you?

PAULA—[_Comes nearer._] I only wanted to say the cap-maker telephoned
again. I told him to send the caps. His man will be here with them in ten
minutes.

COUNT—That was clever of you. Thanks very much.

PAULA—Not at all, your excellency. [_She exits through the archway._]

COUNT—[_His glance has followed her until she vanished._] Well, then ...
there was something I wanted to say.

JUHASZ—Where you want the cap sent.

COUNT—Yes. Hm! Nowhere. I’m going to the casino ... my motor will pick me
up there.... You keep the cap for me here. I’ll stop for it later.

OSCAR—[_Briskly._] Just as you say, sir. I’ll have it packed up for you
at once. Excuse me, excellency. [_Hurries off through the archway._]

COUNT—[_Stares after him in amazement; does not speak until he is gone._]
What an extraordinary fellow!

JUHASZ—[_With an apologetic smile._] He is always in a hurry.

COUNT—[_Comes affectionately close to JUHASZ._] Business bad, eh?
[_JUHASZ looks quickly at ADELE._] Yes, she told me.

ADELE—I didn’t think we had any secrets from his——

JUHASZ—From his excellency? No. But I don’t like to have you complain——

COUNT—She didn’t complain. She only answered my questions.

JUHASZ—Well, there are a few difficulties, but ... we’ll overcome them
somehow. We shan’t go into bankruptcy.

COUNT—I should hope not.

JUHASZ—We’ve worked faithfully ... but one can’t expect the sun to shine
all the time. There must be cloudy days, too. But they pass.

COUNT—[_Affectionately._] I should be offended if my friend Juhasz were
in trouble and didn’t tell me. Well? You must tell me.

JUHASZ—No real trouble, your excellency. I have my health and a good
little wife [_takes her hand_] who loves me.

COUNT—[_To ADELE, approvingly._] That’s right. Bravo!

JUHASZ—And friends ... my smart and loyal Oscar. He is the heart and soul
of the business.

COUNT—He seems a bit ... sudden.

JUHASZ—And then there is Paula. She is the policeman of the business.
Now, how can I possibly go wrong?

COUNT—Well, my dear Juhasz, I must be off. [_As he shakes hands._] I
can only tell you again what I told you once before, when you were in
difficulties.... For fifteen years you sat at a desk in my castle at
Gerelypuszta. I never had as good a man in my service before or since. It
is true you wasted a lot of your time cultivating flowers, and at best
you were never very energetic....

JUHASZ—That is something one learns.

COUNT—Never, but that doesn’t matter. It is character that counts with
me. That desk has been vacant three years now. I want you to know that,
whatever happens, that place is open to you as long as Gerelypuszta
belongs to me or my family.

JUHASZ—Oh, your excellency!

COUNT—If I only had someone half as honest as you right now! We are
beginning to export cheese on a large scale. Mostly to England.

JUHASZ—Puszta cheese?

COUNT—Yes ... it has been a great success. London is mad about that
cheese. And so am I. I took first prize with it in London and in
Edinburgh, too. You have no idea how proud that made me.

JUHASZ—I remember your first experiment with that cheese.

COUNT—But you’d never know it now. [_With enthusiasm._] I succeeded in
crossing two breeds: Camembert, that over-ripe beauty, with Roquefort,
that sharp, sardonic old gentleman. And the child of that marriage I
nurtured and reared with my own hands. So naturally I am proud of the
career it is making for itself.... Well, I must be going. Remember, let
nothing worry you. If everything else fails you: Gerelypuszta, Desk,
Cheese! Good night!

ADELE—Good night, your excellency.

JUHASZ—[_Opens the door._] See you later, excellency. [_The COUNT exits.
He closes the door._] You shouldn’t have complained to him, dear.

ADELE—I didn’t. He asked me.

JUHASZ—I don’t want to be put in a false position. He has done more for
me already than my own father could have done.

ADELE—[_Hesitantly._] Well, now, Peter ... if you have a moment....

JUHASZ—Certainly, my angel. I’m really curious to know what it is that’s
agitating this [_takes her head in his hands_] precious little head.
[_Looks into her eyes._] See here! There are tears in your eyes! It isn’t
anything serious?

ADELE—Yes, Peter, it is serious ... very serious.

JUHASZ—Well?

ADELE—[_Pulls a stool over for him._] Sit down here, Peter.

JUHASZ—Serious as that? [_He sits._]

ADELE—There are two separate things I must talk to you about. And one is
harder than the other.

JUHASZ—Let us have the hardest first.

ADELE—If you weren’t such a good man, it wouldn’t be half as difficult to
tell you—— [_She dries her eyes._]

JUHASZ—There, there, my dear! I am sure you have done nothing you need to
cry about.

ADELE—It’s on your account I’m crying.

JUHASZ—On my account?

ADELE—Peter ... [_Dries her eyes; collects herself._] Those different
sums of money ... you gave me ... I made you give me ... these past three
years ... because you are so foolish about money ... and can’t refuse
anyone who asks you.... I told you I was putting the money in a savings
bank.... Well, so I did.... You know it amounts to fifty-one thousand
kronen.

JUHASZ—I know.

ADELE—I just found out from Oscar that there had been a meeting of your
creditors, and that the lawyer came to see you.... You didn’t tell me.

JUHASZ—No, dear.

ADELE—You didn’t tell me because you were afraid I’d be worried. I
know.... You offered the creditors this fifty-one thousand kronen on
account of their claims if they would refrain from forcing you into
bankruptcy ... and they accepted because they like you and trust you
[_bursts into tears_] and know you are the best and most honest man in
the world.

JUHASZ—I asked Oscar not to say anything to you about it.

ADELE—He was right to tell me. And now, Peter, it is terrible to have to
say it straight to your face....

JUHASZ—You spent some of the money. No matter, my child. Don’t let it
worry you.

ADELE—Oh, my God ... my God....

JUHASZ—All the money isn’t worth this agitation. Tell me how much is
gone. I’ll raise it somehow.

ADELE—A great deal is gone.

JUHASZ—How much? Whatever you spent, I’m sure you did it for the best.

ADELE—Peter ... forgive me ... it is all gone.

JUHASZ—All?

ADELE—All. There isn’t a heller left.... Peter ... [_Weeping._] Kill me.
I have ruined you. [_A brief pause._]

JUHASZ—My dear ... really ... it doesn’t matter.... I thought God knows
what had happened ... but if that’s all....

ADELE—Don’t try to make light of it, Peter. I know perfectly well that
what the lawyer told you was the creditors’ very last offer. But when I
found that out, it was too late. The money was gone.

JUHASZ—Now you mustn’t cry. It’s childish to take the thing so much to
heart. Everything will be all right. The lawyer’s heart isn’t made of
stone.

ADELE—[_Weeping._] All lawyers’ hearts are made of stone.

JUHASZ—We’ll have a nice little talk with him. My money is your money,
isn’t it? It’s all my fault, anyway. Why didn’t I save the money
myself?... You had a perfect right to spend it. Kiss me, and tell what
else is troubling you.

ADELE—[_Kisses him._] You are so good!

JUHASZ—Well now, out with the other calamity.

ADELE—That is much harder.

JUHASZ—No matter, my dear. It won’t be as bad as you suppose.

ADELE—You know that I have always been a faithful wife to you.... We
have no children ... and ours wasn’t exactly a love marriage ... but
all my affections were yours. [_JUHASZ takes her hand._] In the whole
three years I never looked at or thought of another man ... and that is
precisely why it’s so hard for me now.... If I weren’t a respectable
woman, it would be easy ... but I simply can’t deceive a man like you....
I can’t.... [_A brief pause._]

JUHASZ—You love ... someone else. [_She only nods. He utters the word for
her softly, thoughtfully._] Yes. [_There is a pause._]

ADELE—I respect you too much to let you go on believing for a single
moment.... [_Another pause._]

JUHASZ—You don’t love me any more.

ADELE—I do care for you, but....

JUHASZ—But you love someone else.

ADELE—I love _you_ like a brother ... you know yourself I never loved
your body ... only your soul.... It was always a struggle for me ... but
now that I love another ... I must tell you.

JUHASZ—This comes ... so suddenly.... I—I—— [_ADELE sobs._] You poor,
dear child.... It’s only a sort of illness.... It will pass.... Every
wife goes through such a crisis ... some time or another.... And I’ll
help you through it.... I’ll be as gentle and tactful as I can.... And
before you know it, you’ll have forgotten all about it ... and come to
your senses ... and be the same happy, contented Adele you used to be....
My good, loyal Adele, I don’t know how another man would act in my place
... but this is how I feel.... But there! Are you crying again?

ADELE—It’s unbearable how good you are!

JUHASZ—Shouldn’t I have said that?

ADELE—Peter ... this isn’t just a passing fancy, as you suppose. I not
only love this man....

JUHASZ—What else?

ADELE—I want to belong to him. [_A pause._]

JUHASZ—That is ... more serious. [_Takes an aimless pace or two, sits
down, puts his head in his hands._] When you said that ... I felt so ...
lonely ... all of a sudden.

[_A delivery boy enters at the door. He carries three big packages and a
rocking-horse._]

DELIVERY BOY—Mr. Peter Juhasz?

JUHASZ—[_Goes to him._] Yes, yes. From the toy store?... All right, my
son, just put them down. [_Gives the boy a tip; calls._] Adolf!

DELIVERY BOY—Thank you, sir. Good night. [_The boy exits at the door.
ADOLF enters through the archway._]

JUHASZ—For your little boy’s birthday to-morrow. A horse, a steamship and
an automobile. And this is for your little girl, so that she won’t feel
slighted.

ADOLF—[_Tries to kiss his hand._] Oh, thank you ... thank you, sir!

JUHASZ—Yes, yes. Take them away.... Or, wait! Leave the steamship here
a moment. I’ll have to show you how it works.... The automobile is
quite simple, but the ship has a rather complicated mechanism.... I’ll
explain it to you before I go home. [_ADOLF puts the steamship under the
down-stage end of the counter at right, then exits through the archway
with the remaining packages. JUHASZ turns to ADELE._] Forgive me.... My
god-son, you know.

ADELE—[_Who has been weeping silently._] Peter, if you only knew how
sorry I am.

JUHASZ—I’m afraid I made it harder for you ... but I have a headache ...
and everything came at once.... I’m sorry ... but you _were_ a bit cruel.

ADELE—Kill me, Peter.

JUHASZ—But you were honest with me ... you couldn’t be anything else. And
yet I think it would have been less painful to me ... if you had simply
betrayed me.

ADELE—I can’t betray you, Peter. I respect you too much. [_Weeping._]
Don’t ask me to do that.

JUHASZ—You want to become another man’s wife. How can I prevent you? Go,
if you must. He is surely a better man than——

ADELE—No, no!

JUHASZ—But you are leaving me for him.

ADELE—You are a much better man ... and yet ... I can’t explain——

JUHASZ—Younger, better looking....

ADELE—Do you know who it is?

JUHASZ—I don’t want to know.

ADELE—I don’t want to hurt you again ... but you must soon find out.

JUHASZ—Soon find out? [_A brief pause._]

ADELE—Oscar.

JUHASZ—Oscar ... our Oscar?

ADELE—Yes. [_A pause._]

JUHASZ—So that ... so that....

ADELE—[_Ardently._] I love him, Peter, and he adores me. And we are
leaving the city.... You will never hear of us again.

JUHASZ—Oscar....

ADELE—All the time we’ve been here together, like one big family, we
could have done things behind your back. But a man like you.... We
couldn’t bring ourselves to deceive you. Oscar couldn’t either. He loves
you like a brother.

JUHASZ—I know ... you are both devoted to me.

ADELE—We are going to Berlin. There a new life awaits us ... but that’s
something you can’t understand, because there is no spirit of adventure
in you.... To escape from this cage ... out into the wide world ... to
try our luck ... and find wealth, perhaps ... and power.... Let me call
him in!

JUHASZ—If you like.

ADELE—He is so fond of you. [_Runs to the archway._] Oscar! [_Comes down
stage again._] It grieves him so.... [_OSCAR enters through the archway,
slowly, sadly. Up stage, between the two counters, he pauses._]

OSCAR—Does he know everything?

ADELE—Yes.

OSCAR—Peter, this moment had to come.

JUHASZ—Never mind that, my son.

OSCAR—[_Begins rhetorically._] From first to last our conduct has been
irreproachable——

JUHASZ—It’s my own conduct I’m thinking about, not yours.

OSCAR—I see you intend to act nobly.

JUHASZ—Nobly?

OSCAR—Or else you would kill both of us.

JUHASZ—Please! I don’t want to stand in your way. I don’t know how
another man would act in my place, but——

OSCAR _and_ ADELE—[_Simultaneously._] The same! Just the same!

JUHASZ—But it’s the way I feel.

OSCAR—You are the best ... the best ... the best.... [_Suddenly kisses
his hand._]

JUHASZ—Have you gone mad?

OSCAR—Pardon me. Before we part forever there is one promise I want to
make you on my sacred word of honor. I’ll send you back that money the
very first day I get it. Not a day later.

ADELE—[_Quickly; embarrassed._] I couldn’t tell you before.... I had
hoped you’d understand. I didn’t spend the fifty-one thousand kronen
myself.... I gave them to Oscar.

OSCAR—[_Quickly._] That is, not for me, but for a little enterprise in
Berlin in which I have bought an interest. A little shop of which I—that
is, we—are to be one-fourth owners. Steger and Company! Steger—that’s
Steger. And the Company—that’s me.... At first I thought of putting up my
own name instead of Company, but as long as Adele got the money I decided
it would be only fair to say Company, and that includes her too....

JUHASZ—She gave the money to you?

OSCAR—I didn’t want it for myself. My God, I can live on bread and water.
But I couldn’t ask Adele to share the uncertain existence of a shop
clerk.... That would have been, if I may say so, unscrupulous of me. I
had to provide for her future.

JUHASZ—If she gave you the money, it’s yours.

OSCAR—I considered that I owed it to _you_ to provide for her future
decently. You would have every right to despise me if I hadn’t.

JUHASZ—I must admit ... you managed things cleverly.

OSCAR—[_In an injured tone._] What do you mean by that? I did everything
honestly and above board. [_Takes ADELE’S hand._] Our relations couldn’t
have been purer if we were two children.

JUHASZ—[_A bit sharply._] Please! I forbid you to discuss that. She is
still my wife. There is no question about her purity here.

OSCAR—[_Aggressively._] I might have known you would take that tone.
[_PHILIP appears in the archway._]

PHILIP—You are wanted on the telephone, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—Coming. [_He exits through the archway; PHILIP lets him pass,
looks frigidly at ADELE and OSCAR, then exits too._]

ADELE—[_Suddenly._] What did you shout at him for?

OSCAR—I know what I’m doing. Just you cry ... and let me shout. Now hurry
and get ready. He’s taken it much too hard to suit me. Where’s your hat?

ADELE—But I’ve got to say good-bye to——

OSCAR—Get your hat when I tell you to! I know what I’m talking about.
Have some consideration for my weak heart, and don’t get me excited.
[_JUHASZ re-enters._]

JUHASZ—[_Sees the hat in ADELE’S hand._] It was your sister. She wanted
to know whether we could come to supper to-night. I told her ... that
... I didn’t know.

OSCAR—Adele is going to her mother’s.

JUHASZ—Right now?

OSCAR—Right now. [_There is a pause._]

JUHASZ—Then ... it’s to-night ... you’re leaving?

OSCAR—We have decided ... as long as everything is settled ... that Adele
hadn’t better go to your house any more. That would only make it harder
for you ... and we would like to ... spare you ... all we can.

ADELE—It’s your feelings we are considering....

JUHASZ—You are right. That would be best.

ADELE—I’m going to mother’s, and Oscar goes to Berlin to-morrow. And we
shan’t see each other again until after the divorce is granted.

OSCAR—We mean to do what’s correct ... everything correct. We owe that
much to you. And, on my word of honor, you’ll get your money back as soon
as I have it. I shan’t wait for profits. No; I’ll send it to you out of
the first money we take in. Without a moment’s delay. Here’s my hand on
it.

JUHASZ—[_Waving away the proffered hand._] That’s all right. I don’t
think you’d lie to me now.

OSCAR—You know me better than that.

JUHASZ—[_To ADELE, who has put on her things._] Then ... we shan’t see
each other ... for a long ... for a long time.... Perhaps never.

OSCAR—[_Uneasily._] Don’t say that. It’s not fair to say that. If ever
you are in Berlin, consider our home your own.

JUHASZ—Thank you.

OSCAR—And let’s not prolong our leavetakings. I’ve got to consider my
weak heart. Excitement is bad for me.

ADELE—Good-bye, Peter. Will you kiss me?

OSCAR—Kiss her. She’s worthy of it. [_Turns away and dries his eyes._]

JUHASZ—[_Kisses her._] Don’t cry, Adele.... I suppose it had to be ...
but not one woman in a thousand would have acted as you have acted....
There! Lift up your head and smile at me.... You were a good wife to me
... and now you are my very good friend. [_ADELE nods._] Shall I see you
as far as your mother’s house?

ADELE—No.... I’ll take a cab. Good-bye, Peter. [_She nods silently to
OSCAR and passes swiftly through the door. There is a brief pause._]

OSCAR—Only one word more, Peter, about a matter of business, and then we
can shake hands and part. I had a talk with the lawyer to-day——

JUHASZ—But, please——

OSCAR—I couldn’t go away and let them throw you into bankruptcy. [_Hands
him a document._] Here is the agreement. Read it over when you get home.
It stipulates that, in consideration of your unquestionable integrity,
your creditors agree not to file a petition in bankruptcy against you,
but to wait six months longer ... for the fifty-one thousand kronen you
lent me.

JUHASZ—Lent you? Yes, that’s right.

OSCAR—And which I will return to you ... my word of honor ... maybe in
two weeks, maybe not for three months, but certainly within six months.
My word of honor!

JUHASZ—[_Turning the document over helplessly._] Yes.

OSCAR—But your creditors make one stipulation. Until the fifty-one
thousand is paid to them, they want a receiver to run the business
instead of you.

JUHASZ—Receiver?

OSCAR—It’s wrong, I know ... but in some ways the creditors are right....
You are too easy with people who owe you money ... and with the people
who work for you.... You are not businesslike.... What this place needs
is a strong hand.... They tried to get me to take charge, but I.... Of
course they didn’t know anything about.... I only said I was leaving the
country.... Well, the main thing is that on the day you pay the fifty-one
thousand kronen the business is yours again.

JUHASZ—And this ... receiver?... When does he take charge?

OSCAR—On the day I leave.

JUHASZ—You said you were leaving to-morrow.

OSCAR—Yes.

JUHASZ—Well, then——

OSCAR—To-morrow morning at eight the receiver will be here.

JUHASZ—Then the shop doesn’t belong to me any more ... and I may as well
stay home to-morrow morning.

OSCAR—What’s the use of exaggerating like that? Certainly you can come
to-morrow.

JUHASZ—As a clerk in my own shop?

OSCAR—Can I help it? Didn’t I do everything I could? Didn’t I run around
seeing people and making arrangements? [_More and more resentfully._] I
didn’t expect any thanks for it, but you needn’t look at me that way. As
for the money, my word of honor——

JUHASZ—I know.

OSCAR—[_Takes his hand._] Good luck! [_Points to the archway._] I’m
going that way. I shan’t even walk the same street as Adele until the
divorce is granted. [_In the archway._] Don’t look at me like that!
[_Emotionally._] I had to provide for her future, hadn’t I? [_He exits.
JUHASZ is left alone. He looks at the document, crumples it into his
pocket, glances around the shop, then sits down near the counter, at
right, staring vacantly. PAULA enters through the archway, a letter in
her hand._]

JUHASZ—You still here, Paula?

PAULA—About those waterproof coats, Mr. Juhasz. Mr. Oscar referred me to
your wife [_notices that ADELE is not there; pauses_]—and she said we
didn’t want any waterproof coats, but I think we really should order a
few. [_Waits for his answer._]

JUHASZ—[_Lost in thought, still staring absently._] Yes. [_A pause._]

PAULA—Shall I order some, Mr. Juhasz?

JUHASZ—[_Looks up at her._] What? Oh, yes.

PAULA—About a dozen? [_A pause._]

JUHASZ—Paula—— [_He rises._] The fact is that from to-morrow on the shop
doesn’t belong to me.

PAULA—Doesn’t belong to you?

JUHASZ—In a word, Paula, my wife has left me and is going to Berlin with
Oscar ... and I have failed.... To-morrow morning a receiver, appointed
by my creditors, takes charge ... and he’ll be the boss here.... So why
should I worry my head about waterproof coats? [_A pause._]

PAULA—I—I don’t know what to say, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—Don’t say anything, Paula. I didn’t say anything myself. No. And
let those letters go for to-night. I can’t have you ruining your eyes.

PAULA—As if you hadn’t troubles enough of your own without worrying about
my eyes.

JUHASZ—Troubles?... Well....

PAULA—I can imagine how you must feel.

JUHASZ—Yes, here I stand like a tree in the park that is only good for
lovers to meet under....

PAULA—And then go away.

JUHASZ—But first they cut their names in it with a sharp knife. [_ADOLF,
carrying his long pole, comes through the archway._] What’s the matter?

ADOLF—It’s eight o’clock, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—[_Still a bit absently._] Yes, you can really close up now, Adolf.
[_ADOLF goes out, pulls the grating half way down._]

COUNT—[_His voice is heard from the street._] Here, here, here! Are you
trying to lock me out again? [_He dodges under the grating and enters.
He is wearing a motor coat and cap. ADOLF, pole in hand, follows him
in, grinning._] Tell me, my friend, do you do that on purpose? [_ADOLF
only grins._] Whenever I try to get in you come along with that big
stick and pull the grating down. You don’t like me, what? [_ADOLF’S grin
is broader._] Here! [_Gives him money._] Here is something for you.
Try to like me better. [_ADOLF tries to kiss his hand. The COUNT waves
him off._] Never mind that. [_The COUNT comes down right. ADOLF exits
through the archway._] He is always trying to close the door in my face.
[_Looks at them wonderingly._] What’s the matter? You look so cheerful,
Juhasz.

JUHASZ—Excellency.... I don’t know how to tell you. [_PAULA is about to
go._] Don’t go, Miss Paula.

PAULA—I only wanted to see whether the cap has arrived for his excellency.

COUNT—Thank you, Paula.

PAULA—Not at all, your excellency. [_She exits through the archway._]

COUNT—Well, what is it? Things going wrong after all?

JUHASZ—Not exactly wrong, excellency. I suppose everything that happens
is for the best. But just a while ago your excellency was kind enough to
repeat what you had often said before.... [_Pushes a stool toward him._]
Please sit down.

COUNT—[_Sits._] Well?

JUHASZ—That desk at Gerelypuszta ... which ... was always open to me.

COUNT—Yes, yes. What of it?

JUHASZ—Well, I’d like to go back to that desk.

COUNT—How’s that? In the last ten minutes you’ve....

JUHASZ—In the last ten minutes.

COUNT—That is very interesting. [_Looks around._] Where is your wife?

JUHASZ—That’s just it, your excellency.

COUNT—I don’t understand.

JUHASZ—My wife is going to divorce me and marry Oscar. The business is
to be taken over by a receiver to-morrow morning. And here I stand, all
alone in the world and free as a bird.

COUNT—[_Jovially._] My dear Juhasz, you are not a bird, you are now
general manager ... or no ... general director of the Gerelypuszta Cheese
Exporting Company.

JUHASZ—Your excellency’s generosity is boundless.

COUNT—The excellence of Gerelypuszta cheese is boundless, and my luck is
boundless to get you back again. Juhasz, I wouldn’t trust my own brother
with that cheese ... but I’ll trust you with it.

JUHASZ—I shall be very happy if....

COUNT—I shall be happy. When can you come? Drive down with me to-night.

JUHASZ—Excellency, my things, my house....

COUNT—How soon _can_ you come?

JUHASZ—Well ... perhaps the end of this week ... or the beginning of next.

COUNT—The sooner the better. You can’t come soon enough to suit me.
[_Rises._] I congratulate myself. [_PAULA enters through the archway._]
Now we will organize things on a big scale, Juhasz. We shall become an
international enterprise. Gerelypuszta Cheeses, Ltd.!... And as to my
neighbor and competitor, Baron Goldberger, we’ll settle him!... But, my
dear friend, how selfish of me! I forgot all about your troubles.

JUHASZ—And I forgot all about your caps, excellency. [_Starts to go._]
Excuse me a moment.

PAULA—The caps just came. Philip is wrapping them up.

JUHASZ—One is to go in with that jockey suit. [_He exits through the
archway. There is a pause._]

COUNT—Well, Miss Paula, what do you think of it?

PAULA—It’s a gorgeous red, your excellency.

COUNT—What is?

PAULA—The cap.

COUNT—You little rogue! You know very well I mean this ... er ...
domestic tragedy.

PAULA—What _can_ I think of it, your excellency? [_Comes nearer to him._]
I know what it means to _me_. I’ve lost my job.

COUNT—How’s that? Can’t you stay on with the new boss?

PAULA—I suppose I could, but mother wouldn’t dream of letting me.... She
only let me work for Mr. Juhasz because he has been a sort of second
father to me. But I know she won’t let me stay under any other boss....
And I haven’t the heart to oppose mother’s wishes. The poor dear is so
ill, and she has trouble enough with my wild brother.

COUNT—[_Who has been studying her appraisingly._] Too bad! I shall be
sorry not to see you any more.

PAULA—Oh, your excellency!

COUNT—But even if you were staying on, I shouldn’t come here any more....
I only came on Juhasz’s account.

PAULA—We all know that, your excellency.

COUNT—Yes. And yet I am really sorry I shan’t be seeing you any more.

PAULA—Oh, your excellency!

COUNT—It was always a great pleasure to see you ... when I happened to
come in.

PAULA—Your excellency embarrasses me.

COUNT—May I make a parting confession? Often I came only for the
privilege of seeing you and exchanging a few casual words with you.
To-day, for instance. Though you did make fun of me.

PAULA—I didn’t, your excellency.

COUNT—Because I am an old boy.... But all is not old that glitters. Why,
my heart feels seventeen when I see you.

PAULA—But, your excellency!

COUNT—Oh, let’s drop that “excellency”! [_PHILIP enters through the
archway, drying his hands._]

PAULA—[_Unaware of PHILIP’S presence._] You mustn’t think I consider you
old.

COUNT—Now ... don’t pretend!

PAULA—Your white hair ... is one of your most attractive features....
If you only knew ... how odious young men are ... compared with an
aristocratic, middle-aged gentleman like.... Oh, your excellency, I beg
pardon.... I’ll go and get your package. [_Makes a movement toward the
archway._]

COUNT—Wait! Juhasz will bring it. Don’t rob me of this last minute with
you.

PAULA—[_With fine coquetry._] Last?

COUNT—You are going home to your mother, and I am going back to
Gerelypuszta.... You are a very clever girl ... and I am not exactly
stupid myself.... It would not be impossible, I daresay, to find you
somewhere in the city.... But an old man must be as cautious and
circumspect ... as a young girl ... and I try to be a very sensible old
man.... I shall teach myself to do without you ... slowly, painlessly.
[_PHILIP goes up behind the counter at back._] Poor Juhasz went into
bankruptcy just in time for me, just in time.

[_JUHASZ, carrying the package, enters through the archway._]

JUHASZ—All packed and ready, your excellency. [_Goes to the door._] I’ll
give it to your chauffeur. [_He exits._]

COUNT—What is that?

PHILIP—One jockey suit and a cap, your excellency.

COUNT—[_Turns in surprise._] Oh, you are here too?

PHILIP—I am here, excellency.

COUNT—[_Turns to PAULA._] Well, then ... good-bye, Miss Paula.

PAULA—[_With a bow._] Your excellency!

COUNT—You don’t even offer to shake hands?

PAULA—Oh!... [_They shake hands._]

COUNT—[_To PHILIP, going._] Good night.

PHILIP—Good night, your excellency.

COUNT—[_In the doorway._] Tell that man with the long stick that he can
pull this grating down now. [_Dodges under the grating and exits._]

JUHASZ—[_His voice is heard from the street._] Good-bye, your excellency.
[_The noise of a motor starting is heard. It dwindles and dies out in the
distance._] [_JUHASZ re-enters._] Well, children. Let’s get finished.
It is high time we were out of here. [_He takes out a drawer of the
cash-register and exits with it through the archway._]

PAULA—I want to bid you good-bye, Philip. I suppose you will be staying
on here.

PHILIP—Yes. You are a very sly young lady, Paula.

PAULA—Am I? Why?

PHILIP—I heard you.

PAULA—Did you hear anything ... wrong?

PHILIP—Wrong?... No.... Just clever.

PAULA—What do you mean?

PHILIP—You know what you’re doing, my girl. Only you started a bit late.
Mr. Juhasz is going, and the shop is gone, and the Count isn’t coming
back, and you won’t be able to flirt with him any more. Too late!

PAULA—Do you think so?

PHILIP—Yes, I do. The Count told you as much to your face.

PAULA—I wouldn’t be so sure of that, Mr. Philip.

PHILIP—Of what?

PAULA—That I shan’t see the Count again.

PHILIP—Now you’re losing your temper.

PAULA—[_With growing passion._] A great deal has gone on in this shop
that you didn’t know about.

PHILIP—Oh, I think not.

PAULA—You’ve worked alongside of me for the past three years and don’t
know me yet.

PHILIP—I think I do.

PAULA—Then you won’t be surprised to hear that I’m going to Gerelypuszta
too.

PHILIP—What? What for?

PAULA—To be near the Count.

PHILIP—In Heaven’s name! [_Clasps his hands in horror._] When did you
decide that?

PAULA—Just now.... This very minute. [_She is greatly excited._] Are you
surprised?... For a whole year that Mrs. Juhasz has plagued me.... You
saw her.... She treated me like a dog.... Tried her best to drive me
away. And why do you suppose I was so patient? Why did I never answer
back?

PHILIP—Miss Paula!

PAULA—[_Still more vehemently._] What did I endure it for? [_Points to
the door._] For my future, Mr. Philip, for my future ... who just passed
through that door ... and rode off in his motor car. But I mean to follow
him, Mr. Philip. Make no mistake about that. That old man has been
staring at me for a year ... ogling me ... and I have been ... slowly
and carefully ... playing my game.... You needn’t look so horrified, Mr.
Philip ... a filthy little intrigue isn’t what I was after ... no ...
here I have sat ... sighing away my youth ... among a lot of motor coats
bound for Paris and Ostend ... pretty travelling veils soon to be worn in
London ... and Monte Carlo ... out in the great, glittering world.... I
want to live, too, Mr. Philip, to live, to live.... And now shall I give
up all hope simply because this little shop has gone under? No, my dear
Philip, I shan’t let his excellency get away from me that easily.

PHILIP—You won’t let him——

PAULA—I’m going to follow him to Gerelypuszta. The rest will be easy.

PHILIP—And what will you tell your mother?

PAULA—That Mr. Juhasz is taking me. She’ll let me go with him.

PHILIP—And what will you tell Mr. Juhasz?

PAULA—That I can’t leave him alone in all this trouble ... that I can’t
part from him.

PHILIP—Deceive him? You too? You’d take advantage of him too?

PAULA—Yes.

PHILIP—You’d use _him_ for a purpose like that?

PAULA—I’m sick of poverty, Mr. Philip.... If you knew how sick I am of
being poor!

PHILIP—It’s monstrous!

PAULA—Can I help it?... I tell you I won’t grow old over a typewriting
machine. I won’t let myself decay in this dingy office.

PHILIP—But Mr. Juhasz——

PAULA—I’m not considering anyone except myself. I need Mr. Juhasz now,
and, no matter what you say, I mean to use him.

PHILIP—[_Scrutinizing her narrowly._] This isn’t wickedness. It’s only
childish egotism.

PAULA—I mean to do just what I said.

PHILIP—And suppose I prevent you?

PAULA—How?

PHILIP—Suppose I tell Mr. Juhasz exactly what you said.

PAULA—First you worm everything out of me ... and then.... But he
wouldn’t believe you.... Besides ... you won’t tell ... you are too fond
of him yourself.

PHILIP—That’s exactly why. He is bound to find out sooner or later.

PAULA—No. A man like him never sees such things. [_Confidently._] You
won’t tell. You won’t open your mouth. [_JUHASZ enters through the
archway, carrying his hat and cane._]

JUHASZ—And now, dear Miss Paula, there is one painful duty left for me to
do. I promised your mother that I would look after you as a father ...
and now ... I must send you back to your mother.... I ... forgive me for
the ceremony ... I discharge you, Miss Paula.... But to-morrow I will use
what influence I may have with the new boss——

PAULA—[_Firmly._] That won’t be necessary, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—Don’t you want to keep your job?

PAULA—No.

JUHASZ—Why not?

PAULA—Because I ... am going with you, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—With me?

PAULA—With you ... wherever you may go.

JUHASZ—[_Amazed._] Miss Paula!

PAULA—There is no use discussing it. You know I always do what I say.

JUHASZ—[_Puts down his hat and stick._] With me, Miss Paula?

PAULA—With you.

JUHASZ—But the place I am going to ... is a tiny village ... deep in the
country ... at the end of the world.

PAULA—I’m going too. If there’s work for you, there will be work for me
too.

JUHASZ—But you are young, Miss Paula.... Why should you leave Budapest
... now ... when so many new enterprises are being founded?... Why, with
your talent and industry——

PAULA—Let us not discuss it, please, Mr. Juhasz. I am going with you.

JUHASZ—Do you hear that, Philip?

PHILIP—[_Morosely._] I hear.

PAULA—Promise that you’ll take me with you ... and look upon me ... as
you always have ... as your child ... as your friend.

JUHASZ—[_Deeply moved._] I am compensated ... Paula ... for all ... all
that I suffered to-day.... God is good to me, after all.

PAULA—[_Low, ashamed._] I am devoted to you, Mr. Juhasz. You know
that.... Will you excuse me now? I must go, or mother will be worried
about me. [_Starts to go._] Besides, I think Mr. Philip has something to
tell you. [_She exits through the archway._]

JUHASZ—[_Deeply touched._] What a heart she has!... That is the stuff
that saints and martyrs are made of.... And to think that here [_with
an emotional break in his voice_]—here in this dim little shop ... such
loyalty ... such devotion should have blossomed ... unknown.... [_Dries
his eyes._] It’s good to know there are such people in the world!
[_PHILIP, in surly silence, picks up his hat and stick, pulls on his
gloves._] Is there something you wanted to say to me, Philip?

PHILIP—Hm.... Do you know that.... [_Stops._]

JUHASZ—Well?

PHILIP—Well, you know ... er....

JUHASZ—Don’t play the cynic with me, you old hypocrite ... you.... I know
what you are hiding under those gruff, silent ways of yours.

PHILIP—No ... that’s not it.

JUHASZ—Now don’t pretend to me.... I know your faithful heart, Philip
... you needn’t be ashamed because you are touched.

PHILIP—[_Lowers his eyes._] You are right.

JUHASZ—I knew it.

PHILIP—[_Softly._] I am touched.

JUHASZ—What were you going to say to me?

PHILIP—I wasn’t going to say anything. [_There is a pause._]

JUHASZ—[_Picks up his hat and stick._] I’m a lucky man, after all....
My wife and Oscar.... You must admit they were honest about it.... And
how eager he was to get me back the shop.... And the Count ... see how
generous he was to me.... And then ... to crown it all ... that good,
loyal girl.... Really, Philip, love and trust are always repaid in kind
in this world.... I’ve found that out.... But you needn’t look so morose
about it....

PHILIP—God bless you, Mr. Juhasz!

JUHASZ—Look after things until I come back.... They are sure to send the
money by autumn.

PHILIP—Are they?

JUHASZ—Oscar? He’ll send it ... if he has to starve for it. [_PAULA
enters, dressed for the street. Behind her comes ADOLF with his pole._]

PHILIP—Good night.

JUHASZ—Are you going to the opera?

PHILIP—No. I gave my ticket to the cap-maker’s apprentice.

JUHASZ—Then you’ll see Paula home as usual?

PHILIP—Sorry. I’m going the other way to-night. Good night!

JUHASZ _and_ PAULA—Good night. [_PHILIP exits through the door. A brief
pause._]

JUHASZ—What’s the matter with Philip to-night?

PAULA—He’s upset, of course. He loves you too.... [_A brief pause._]

ADOLF—Can I close up now?

JUHASZ—Certainly. [_ADOLF exits. A brief pause._] What are you waiting
for? Why don’t you pull it down?

ADOLF—[_Sticks his head in the doorway._] I was just looking to see
if his excellency was coming. [_He vanishes. The sound of the grating
descending is heard._]

JUHASZ—Now then ... I’ll see you home myself, Paula.

PAULA—Don’t bother, Mr. Juhasz. I live quite near, you know.

JUHASZ—No matter. And I’m not in a hurry to-night anyway.

ADOLF—[_Finished with the door._] If you please, Mr. Juhasz, your maid
telephoned a while ago to ask why you were so late. Your supper is
getting spoiled.

PAULA—There, you see.... Please don’t bother about me.

JUHASZ—Not at all.... [_To ADOLF._] Phone and tell her that I shan’t be
home for supper to-night. I’ll go to a restaurant. [_ADOLF exits through
the archway._]

PAULA—You are quite right.... The empty house and the vacant place at
table....

JUHASZ—Not that, but ... you see ... my wife is very fond of asparagus
... and it’s out of season and hard to get.... This afternoon I got some
... the first asparagus to arrive in the city.... And I sent it home ...
for supper ... a surprise, you know.... Well ... now ... if I go home ...
what can I say to the maid?... Shall I stand there and be ashamed ... of
the asparagus? [_A brief pause._] Or shall I eat it myself?

ADOLF—[_In the archway._] I am putting out the lights, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—[_To PAULA, who is about to go._] One moment. [_To ADOLF._] Wait,
my son, there is something I promised you. [_He takes the toy steamship
from under the counter, at right. He stands behind the counter. ADOLF
comes down in front of it._] Now, look here, my son. See this little lid?
You lift it up like that. See?

ADOLF—Yes, sir.

JUHASZ—[_Begins in a matter-of-fact way, but gradually his voice grows
more sorrowful until, in the end, it is trembling with suppressed sobs._]
In here are two keys. This one winds up the wheels when you want the ship
to run along the floor. This one winds up the propeller. See ... that
is the propeller. It makes the ship move through the water ... if there
is any water. The thing to remember is that you mustn’t turn the key
backwards, for then the spring unwinds. And when you wind it, you must
wind it very slowly, just as you wind a watch, very slowly.... [_He turns
the key three times while ADOLF watches absorbedly. Nothing is heard
but the click of the turning cog-wheels as the curtain slowly, almost
imperceptibly, falls._]




ACT TWO




ACT TWO


    [_The COUNT’S workroom in a little outbuilding devoted to the
    business of the estate. A wide glass door back center, with a
    window on either side of it, looks on a terrace and a quaint
    old garden beyond. At the right and left are doors to other
    offices._

    _Up right stands the COUNT’S huge desk and in front of it, to
    the right, a small table on which is a typewriting machine. Up
    left is a long table covered with a litter of papers, books and
    pamphlets. Down left, against the wall, stands a little sofa._

    _It is a bright summer morning. The COUNT sits at his desk.
    DOMOKOS, an elderly clerk, is making a report to him._]

DOMOKOS—And about that fellow, Mate. He’s the most useless man about the
place. An absolute disgrace to the dairy.

COUNT—And the favorite of Mr. Juhasz.

DOMOKOS—Yes, excellency. I’d have discharged Mate long ago, but Mr.
Juhasz won’t let me. He’s sorry for the man.

COUNT—Sorry for him!

DOMOKOS—Mate has such a glib tongue he always manages to get around Mr.
Juhasz somehow. But this time ... he hadn’t turned up for three days.
This morning he reported for work again, looking very seedy. But this
time we’ve caught him right. I found this letter ... [_exhibits the
letter_] which proves beyond a doubt that Mate is the paid spy of our
competitor, Baron Goldberger.

COUNT—Goldberger!

DOMOKOS—Yes, of Baron Goldberger.

COUNT—Not _Baron_ Goldberger....

DOMOKOS—Pardon me ... no. Of Goldberger. And, if Mr. Juhasz doesn’t
discharge him now....

COUNT—I’ll see to it. Where is this Mate? [_He rings._]

DOMOKOS—I told him to wait out there in the little office. [_Points to
the left._]

COUNT—Give me that letter. [_DOMOKOS gives it to him. SANTHA, an old man,
half clerk, half servant, enters at left; waits at the door._] Send Mate
in.

SANTHA—Yes, your excellency.

COUNT—Then ask Miss Paula to step in.

SANTHA—Yes, your excellency. [_Exits at left._]

DOMOKOS—Mr. Juhasz is spoiling all the men with that benevolence of his.
[_MATE enters at left. He is young; wears a white linen jacket which is
soiled and torn. Behind him SANTHA enters and crosses to right, where he
exits._]

COUNT—I am told you have been neglecting your work and going off on a
spree for days at a time.

MATE—I was home ... sick, excellency. And Mr. Juhasz....

DOMOKOS—You were seen in a beer garden in Budapest three different times.

COUNT—That will do, Mate. Wait out there until you are sent for. Mr.
Juhasz will attend to you.

MATE—Excellency, I give you my word—— [_SANTHA is seen crossing the
garden from right to left._]

COUNT—That will do, Mate. [_MATE exits at left. The COUNT rises._] Thank
you, Domokos. Let me have the rest of your report this afternoon.... I am
busy now. Leave that letter here. [_Rings._] Where is Juhasz?

DOMOKOS—I saw him down near the hothouses. I think he’s feeding the
pigeons.

COUNT—Naturally.

DOMOKOS—Yes, sir. [_He exits at left as PAULA enters at right._]

PAULA—Good morning!

COUNT—Good morning, sunbeam. Quick, quick. We can talk now. Your duenna
is away ... feeding the pigeons.

PAULA—Your excellency is always saying unkind things about Mr. Juhasz.
[_She sits at the typewriting machine._]

COUNT—And yet I love him as I would my own son. [_Kisses PAULA’S hand._]

PAULA—I must pretend to be working. If he comes in and finds me just
talking to you, he’ll be unhappy again.

COUNT—No fear of that now.... He is a long way from here.

PAULA—As if that mattered! He divines the fact that we are together. And
he can find me with his eyes shut. [_Taps once or twice on the machine._]
Please don’t let him catch us like this.

COUNT—This is intolerable, Paula. It can’t go on. One of the reasons I
sent for you was to tell you that I mean to get rid of Juhasz to-day.

PAULA—[_Sorrowfully._] Your excellency....

COUNT—There is a dairyman named Mate, a wholly untrustworthy fellow,
whom he won’t dismiss. That gives me a perfect excuse, and I intend to
make use of it. For I can’t let this sort of thing go on indefinitely.
He’s always on your heels like a watch-dog, and I’m sick of it.... It
isn’t enough that he’s practically useless around the place ... but he
demoralizes everything with that benevolence of his ... my dignity ...
even my cheese.... And to crown it all he makes me play the comedian in
my own house. In order to be alone with you I must give you dictation.
And in order to give you dictation I must make political speeches....
And I detest political speeches....

PAULA—[_Listening._] Wasn’t that the door? He’s just come in the
anteroom. Dictate to me! Hurry!

COUNT—It’s enough to drive a man to despair. [_Loudly, as PAULA types._]
“If the Minister of Agriculture supposes ... that the farmers of the
country will tolerate ... such a thing, he is gravely mistaken.” I’ll
discharge him. I’ll discharge him this very day.... No.... Don’t write
that ... I don’t mean the minister.

PAULA—[_As she writes._] Don’t be unkind to him.... He’s such a dear,
gentle soul.

COUNT—[_Loudly._] The tiller of the soil asks little of his Government....

PAULA—[_As she writes._] It’s sheer gratitude that makes him guard me so
faithfully, gratitude to me for having come here with him.

COUNT—I’ve put up with his gratitude until I’m weary of it. It’s four
months since you came here. Do you realize it? Four months you have
tormented me ... on his account. Four months you have been postponing my
happiness from day to day ... on his account.

PAULA—You must be patient a little longer. He’ll go of his own accord ...
as soon as he gets his fifty-one thousand kronen from Berlin. Meantime,
I can’t let you be unkind to him ... no ... not on my account.

COUNT—He’ll never get the money. And I can’t wait. I am fifty-six, Paula,
and desperately in love ... in love, do you hear.... [_Comes nearer to
her._] You beautiful ... young ... thing! [_JUHASZ enters at left with a
big ledger under his arm._]

JUHASZ—I beg pardon. Shall I check up the live-stock too?

COUNT—[_Crossly._] Yes. [_To PAULA._] “The deplorable policies
inaugurated by the Minister of Agriculture....” [_PAULA types._] By the
way, Miss, is that detailed statement finished?

PAULA—Your excellency, my eyes have been troubling me ... and ... I have
only finished with the summaries. [_Hands him a sheaf of closely written
documents._]

COUNT—[_Affecting severity._] You must manage to get more work done, Miss
Paula. Please be sure to have the detailed statements ready for me by
this evening. [_JUHASZ exits at left._]

PAULA—He heard you as he came in. I’m sure he heard you!... Oh, I’m so
sorry!

COUNT—You needn’t be. It doesn’t matter any more. I shan’t let him hinder
me any longer. I can’t afford to. I’m too old. The only thing left to do
is pay the fifty-one thousand kronen, give him back his shop and be rid
of him.

PAULA—He won’t accept it. He’d rather starve.

COUNT—[_With a touch of exasperation._] Curious that your friends never
have such scruples, only your enemies.

PAULA—Have you noticed how badly he looks? That’s from worrying about me.

COUNT—It’s from staying up nights, pacing to and fro beneath my window.
He has the bad taste to suppose that I would seduce one of my employees
in my own house.... But ... sunbeam ... our love deserves a worthier
setting ... doesn’t it?... A flight to Paris by the swiftest motor we can
find ... and from there southward to the sea ... under the skies of Spain
that God only made for people to love under.... [_Comes nearer to her.
JUHASZ enters at left._]

JUHASZ—I beg pardon. I only wanted to give Miss Paula these.

COUNT—[_Crossly._] Certainly. Certainly.

JUHASZ—[_Gives PAULA a bundle of closely written pages._] Here are the
detailed statements his excellency wants. Mr. Santha was kind enough to
get them up last night.

PAULA—He did them for me? [_Looks at the pages; smiles; to the COUNT._]
Forty pages, all closely written. Oh, that dear Mr. Santha! I don’t know
how to thank him. [_Gives the pages to the COUNT._]

COUNT—[_Looks at them._] Mr. Santha wrote these?

PAULA—Wasn’t it darling of him? Think of it! He must have worked all
night, the poor——

COUNT—[_Comparing them with the summaries._] Curious how like these are
the ones you wrote yourself.

PAULA—Oh, I may as well confess it, your excellency. I didn’t write those
either. Mr. Juhasz did.

COUNT—Oh? Juhasz did?

JUHASZ—It was only three pages ... and Miss Paula’s eyes bothered her.

COUNT—[_With a sheaf of pages in each hand._] So, then, Juhasz wrote
these three pages, and Santha wrote these forty?

PAULA—Yes.

COUNT—[_He rings. SANTHA enters._] Wait a moment, Santha. [_To JUHASZ._]
There was a light in your room until four this morning. What were you
doing up so late?

JUHASZ—I’m not a very successful liar, excellency. I wrote the detailed
statements too....

COUNT—Thank you, Santha. You may go. [_He throws the statements on the
table. SANTHA exits at left._]

PAULA—I am very grateful to you, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—Oh, I am glad to have been of service. [_He exits at left._]

COUNT—Tell me ... isn’t this Juhasz in love with you?

PAULA—[_In honest amazement._] How can you say such a thing? It is
nothing but his goodness, his exaggerated sense of gratitude. He thinks
he owes me his aid and his protection because I followed him here into
exile.

COUNT—I’ll exile him for good this time. Wait and see.

PAULA—You won’t be unkind to him ... please ... don’t be.

COUNT—Don’t worry.... I’ll be absolutely just with him. I’ll simply
confront him with the case of this fellow Mate whom he can’t bring
himself to dismiss. And I’ll say to him, “Now, it’s Mate or you.” And as
it is perfectly certain that he will never be able to harden his heart
to the point of dismissing anyone, he’ll have no alternative but to go
himself. And then ... [_ardently_] my happiness begins ... and yours,
Paula ... for you are my last love ... and last love is like the setting
sun ... full of fire and gold.... [_He approaches her ardently. JUHASZ
enters at left, a big book under his arm._]

JUHASZ—The swine aren’t entered in the books.

COUNT—Oh!... There’s a limit to everything! [_Goes to the door at left,
calling angrily._] Mr. Santha! Didn’t I say I was not to be disturbed
while dictating? Where is the fellow! [_Exits at left, leaving the door
open._]

JUHASZ—[_To PAULA, quickly._] I heard all the dreadful things he said to
you. And it’s my fault. I brought you here.

PAULA—But, Mr. Juhasz——

JUHASZ—I brought you here ... and now I don’t know what to do.... I ...
I’ll talk to him ... and forbid him to——

PAULA—Please, Mr. Juhasz, don’t do anything of the kind!

JUHASZ—He wants to get rid of me anyhow. I know I’m in his way ...
because he wants you.... But don’t worry, my child, I shan’t let him
_drive_ me away. [_The COUNT enters at left._]

COUNT—Absolutely demoralized! All of them.

JUHASZ—The swine....

COUNT—Don’t bother me now with your swine. Come back later. [_JUHASZ
exits at left._]

COUNT—It gets worse all the time. He used to give us at least a few
minutes together, but now he keeps popping in like a—— [_Stops, enraged,
for a word._]

PAULA—He heard what you said to me before.

COUNT—Did he say anything to you?

PAULA—He promised to ... watch you closer than ever ... from now on.

COUNT—That’s an insult to you! Why don’t you forbid it?

PAULA—I thought of doing it, but when he looks at you ... with those
soft, kind eyes of his——

COUNT—I know. He has eyes like a devoted horse. I can’t endure them
either.... But now I’ve had enough. The thing must end to-day. If he
comes in once more, you must go out, my dear, and leave me alone with him.

PAULA—He won’t come in again. You made it plain to him that he mustn’t.

COUNT—You don’t know him. He’ll be in the moment he hears what he is
listening for. I’m perfectly certain he’s listening. [_Goes toward the
door at left._] Watch. [_Loudly._] Paula, I wonder if you know how sweet,
how charming, how utterly adorable you are. [_Approaches the door as he
speaks._] [_JUHASZ enters quickly, determinedly at left. When he sees
the COUNT standing there, smiling sarcastically, he stops short in the
doorway, abashed._]

JUHASZ—May I talk to you about the swine now?

COUNT—Come in. [_To PAULA, sternly._] Make a copy of what I have
dictated, Miss Paula.

PAULA—Yes, sir. [_Rises, gathers up her papers._]

COUNT—[_Sternly._] A clean and correct copy.

PAULA—Yes, your excellency. [_She exits at right._]

JUHASZ—The swine, your excellency——

COUNT—Never mind that, Juhasz.... There is something else I want to talk
with you about.... There are many complaints against you. Very many!

JUHASZ—I know your excellency isn’t satisfied with me.

COUNT—But my pigeons are satisfied, eh?

JUHASZ—Is that what you are displeased about, sir?

COUNT—You feed them too much. They are so fat they won’t fly any more.
And when I ask for a pigeon for my luncheon I am informed that Mr. Juhasz
won’t permit one to be killed.

JUHASZ—I’m so sorry for the poor soft little creatures....

COUNT—And aren’t you sorry for the poor soft little ox?

JUHASZ—I don’t know him personally, sir.

COUNT—Humph!

JUHASZ—It doesn’t seem right to me ... to eat your personal acquaintances.

COUNT—[_Significantly._] It does to me.

JUHASZ—If that’s the only complaint....

COUNT—It isn’t. There are many more. You and I will have to part company,
Juhasz. I can’t keep you here any longer.... Now every time I broach the
subject ... you look at me like that.

JUHASZ—[_Averts his eyes._] I’m sorry, sir.

COUNT—[_Irritably._] I once had a horse named Trafalgar. He was just like
you.

JUHASZ—Like me?

COUNT—He broke his leg ... and I couldn’t have him shot because he used
to look at me ... exactly as you do. [_In spite of himself, JUHASZ looks
at him._] Don’t look at me like that! I forbid it!

JUHASZ—[_Looking away._] Yes, your excellency.

COUNT—[_Consults a memorandum._] Here is a long list of your offenses.
First, there’s that potter, Mano Steiner, who owes us eight thousand
kronen. You granted him an extension of one year. What for?

JUHASZ—Pots, your excellency.

COUNT—I know that.

JUHASZ—And the poor fellow has had so much trouble of late.

COUNT—Trouble?

JUHASZ—Business trouble.

COUNT—You have no right to be charitable at my expense.

JUHASZ—Wasn’t there some other complaint, too, sir?

COUNT—Yes, lots of them. [_Consults the memorandum._] You owe three
hundred and thirty kronen to the all-night café.

JUHASZ—Not for myself, excellency.

COUNT—I know. You assumed that fellow Mate’s debts. And now that he has
credit again he has resumed his drinking.

JUHASZ—Oh, your excellency, he didn’t owe the three hundred and thirty
kronen for drinks.

COUNT—For what, then?

JUHASZ—For hard-boiled eggs.

COUNT—Is that what he told you? Let me see. That would make 640
hard-boiled eggs in a single month. Or twenty-one a day.

JUHASZ—Yes, the poor fellow has to eat twenty-two every day. The doctor
has put him on an egg diet.... But that bill at the café is paid.

COUNT—Juhasz, Juhasz, it’s sinful the way you let people rob you. I
suppose you haven’t a heller to your name.

JUHASZ—Well, just at present——

COUNT—I thought so.

JUHASZ—What is next on the list, your excellency?

COUNT—The next is very serious. It concerns your protégé, Mate. We have
discovered that he is Goldberger’s spy.

JUHASZ—I don’t believe it, sir.

COUNT—[_Picks up a letter._] Perhaps this letter, written in his own
hand, may convince you. It is written to Goldberger, acknowledging
the receipt of two hundred kronen in payment for a full list of our
customers.... There is no possible doubt about it now.... The foreman
wanted the man discharged a month ago, but you refused to permit it.

JUHASZ—But I didn’t know he had done this, your excellency.

COUNT—Well, you know it now. And I trust you have no further doubt that
the man must be dismissed.

JUHASZ—Well ... if he has done this ... then ... I think the foreman
ought to dismiss him.

COUNT—The foreman ought? Oh, no, Juhasz! You’ll dismiss him yourself.

JUHASZ—[_Aghast._] I?

COUNT—It’s your last chance. Here is the letter. [_Gives it to him._]
Mate is waiting out there. You will tell him he is dismissed. [_Rings._]
I’ll be back in five minutes. If Mate is dismissed I’ll be willing to
believe that there is some hope you may mend your ways. If he’s not
dismissed, then, my son, you and I part company. [_SANTHA enters._] Send
Mate in here. [_SANTHA exits at left._] Five minutes!

JUHASZ—Excellency, may I ask one favor?

COUNT—Well?

JUHASZ—Make it ... ten minutes. It’s not so easy for me.

COUNT—Very good. Ten minutes. [_Takes out his watch._] What time have you
got?

JUHASZ—[_Takes out his watch._] Ten-thirty.

COUNT—At ten-forty Mate is dismissed or you leave this place to-day. [_He
exits at back. Left alone, JUHASZ scratches his head ruefully. PAULA
enters at right._]

JUHASZ—For goodness’ sake, Paula ... don’t come in now ... every moment
is precious.... [_Pushes her gently toward the door at right._]

PAULA—What’s the matter?

JUHASZ—I’ve no time to lose now.... I’ve got to hurt someone ... very
much ... in order to be able to stay near you ... and protect you. Don’t
ask me. [_Pushes her toward the door._]

PAULA—What has happened? [_MATE enters at right._]

JUHASZ—The Count thinks he knows me. But this time I’ll show him he’s
wrong. Give me your hand. Give me strength. [_Clasps her hand._] Go now,
Paula, and rely on me.... You shall see how strong I can be. In ten
minutes it will be over. [_PAULA exits at right. JUHASZ closes the door
behind her, pauses a moment to collect his courage, then, without turning
to face MATE, bellows at him._] So there you are!

MATE—I’ve got regards for you, boss, from Budapest. I was in your shop.

JUHASZ—Never mind that now.

MATE—I bought a necktie there. [_Shows his cravat._] Maybe you recognize
it. The people all sent their regards.

JUHASZ—Never mind that now, please.... [_Fingers the cravat._] Thanks,
but we have something else to discuss just now.

MATE—[_Genially._] They told me business was fine.... And they are all
expecting you back soon.

JUHASZ—Now, Mate, please don’t keep interrupting. I’ve something very
serious—— [_Flourishes the letter._] You have caused me a great deal of
trouble, Mate.

MATE—[_Smoothly._] Oh, don’t say that, boss! I’d rather be dead than
cause you any trouble.

JUHASZ—[_Distressed._] Now don’t talk like that——

MATE—But, if——

JUHASZ—[_With determination._] Be still now. And let me talk.

MATE—[_With an injured expression._] All right.

JUHASZ—[_Relenting._] Or ... what were you going to say?

MATE—[_Aggrieved._] Oh, nothing.

JUHASZ—I didn’t mean to be rude. I am a bit excited, you see.
[_Flourishes the letter._] This letter was just handed to me. [_Looks at
it._] You took ... two hundred kronen ... from Baron Goldberger. [_Shows
it to him._] Is this your handwriting?

MATE—If you say it is——

JUHASZ—Mate, don’t make it harder for me. It’s painful enough as it is.
And I have so little time.... Is this your handwriting?

MATE—Well, yes.

JUHASZ—There, you see! [_A brief pause. He looks at his watch._]

MATE—Well, I know what to expect. Get it over with.

JUHASZ—You are a traitor, Mate. This letter proves it.

MATE—That’s all right. You can discharge me if you want to.

JUHASZ—Why do you make it harder for me, Mate? Do you think I like to do
this?... You don’t even say a word in your own defense.

MATE—What’s the use of my saying anything? I know that I’ve got the sack.

JUHASZ—But how could you do such a thing? _Why_ did you do it? _Why?_

MATE—If I told you, you wouldn’t believe me. I’m a liar, I am. Everybody
says so.

JUHASZ—Don’t be so pig-headed! Did you ... perhaps ... need the money for
something urgent?... You haven’t a family, have you?

MATE—I have a crippled father.

JUHASZ—There! I knew there was something. Why didn’t you say so? Have you
no faith in me? [_Fingers MATE’S cravat._] What did they ask you for this
necktie?

MATE—Four kronen.

JUHASZ—Why, it only sells for three!

MATE—I only paid two.... There are so many wicked people in the world,
Mr. Juhasz. I’d have been a different man if I’d ’a been treated right
... but I wasn’t.... Everybody around here was always down on me.... And
now they’ve got me where they want me....

JUHASZ—[_With heat._] Have they? Not yet. Make no mistake about that.
[_Pumping up his determination._] So you have a crippled father?

MATE—Yes, my poor father!

JUHASZ—It seems to me I heard you were an orphan.

MATE—They say all kinds of things about me around here. My father lives
in Szentes. If you can call it living. [_Working himself up into a
passion._] If you must know, I sent the two hundred kronen to him.

JUHASZ—[_Eagerly._] Can you prove that?

MATE—Certainly.

JUHASZ—How?

MATE—By this. [_Shows him a photograph._]

JUHASZ—By this? This is a photograph.

MATE—Of my father. The picture of my poor old father.

JUHASZ—But this is a photograph of the actor, Girardi.

MATE—They resemble each other a lot. Everybody says so.

JUHASZ—[_Thoughtfully._] Hum! And what does this prove?

MATE—That he’s the one ... I sent the dirty money to.

JUHASZ—[_Undeceived._] No, Mate. You are lying to me. [_Returns the
photograph to him._] This is unpardonable.... They were perfectly right
in what they said about you. [_Looks at his watch._] You are dismissed,
Mate ... and now you may go. [_Does not trust himself to look at MATE,
but gives him a shove toward the door._]

MATE—[_Kisses the photograph._] Poor father! Who’ll send you money now
... the first of every month?

JUHASZ—[_Greatly distressed._] Please ... stop that ... and go!

MATE—And my poor little girl ... who’ll feed her now?

JUHASZ—You have a child, too?... I don’t want to hear about it.

MATE—I didn’t say anything to you. [_Starts to go._] My poor, sick little
girl!

JUHASZ—[_Restrains him; greatly distressed._] Is she ill?

MATE—What do you care?

JUHASZ—How old is she?

MATE—[_Dries his eyes._] Two years old. Her mother is dead. We planted
flowers on her grave.

JUHASZ—This is harrowing.... I know you are lying again.... I mustn’t
listen to you. [_Looks at his watch._]

MATE—A little blonde baby. With hair like flax.

JUHASZ—Ten-thirty-six. You are dismissed. [_Puts his hands over his
ears._]

MATE—She always says to me, “Papa ... Papa send money.”

JUHASZ—I’m not listening to you.... You are lying.... But I can’t hear
you.

MATE—My poor innocent angel. Her medicines alone cost me.... Oh, how
_can_ a man go straight when he has a crippled father and a sick baby to
keep?

JUHASZ—[_Takes his hands from his ears._] I didn’t hear you.... You are
dismissed.

MATE—The doctor prescribed sulphur for her ... and milk.

JUHASZ—I’m not listening.

MATE—No.... But I wish I knew how to close my ears when my poor hungry
baby cries, “Papa, papa....”

JUHASZ—[_At the end of his endurance._] Liar!... You are dismissed....
[_Reconsiders it, angrily._] You are not dismissed! Oh, how can I tell
whether you are lying or not?

MATE—[_Low, reproachfully._] Oh, Mr. Juhasz!

JUHASZ—[_Angrily._] Be still! [_Less angrily._] Sit down. [_Less angrily
yet._] Have a cigarette.

MATE—[_Drying his eyes._] I only smoke cigars.

JUHASZ—[_Crossly pushes the humidor toward him._] There! [_MATE takes
one._] Not those.... [_Shouts._] Take a Havana. [_MATE sticks several in
his pocket._] Stop that crying.... And tell me instead, whether you are
lying to me or not.

MATE—[_Snivelling._] When all a man earns is eighty kronen a month....

JUHASZ—I know, I know.

MATE—And has to send forty to his father, and thirty to his sick boy....
[_as JUHASZ makes a gesture of surprise_] I mean girl ... what has he got
left? Ten kronen! Can you live on ten kronen a month?

JUHASZ—It’s terrible, I know.... Mate.... [_Scratches his head in
bewilderment._] I wish I knew what to do.

MATE—If I had anything left to pawn ... but I haven’t.

JUHASZ—[_Feels involuntarily for his watch chain._] If I had any money
myself.... But just at present ... I regret to say....

MATE—[_His eyes fixed on JUHASZ’S chain._] If I had a watch ... or a
chain....

JUHASZ—[_Takes out his watch._] What’s the matter with your baby?

MATE—It’s anæmic.

JUHASZ—Poor child! [_Takes his watch off the chain._]

MATE—[_Watching him greedily._] That comes from being undernourished.

JUHASZ—[_Gives him the watch._] What the child needs is plenty of fresh
milk.

MATE—[_Regarding the watch in his palm with pretended amazement._] What’s
this?

JUHASZ—A gold watch.

MATE—[_Offers to return it._] But, please——

JUHASZ—Stop annoying me! [_Pushes it back._] The pawnbroker will lend you
a hundred kronen on it.... Some day, when you have the money, you can
redeem it.

MATE—But, Mr. Juhasz——

JUHASZ—Take it. You can’t get anything on the chain. It’s plated.

MATE—[_Pockets the watch. His voice is tearful._] People like you, Mr.
Juhasz, give a man faith again.

JUHASZ—Stop your crying.... I’ll speak to his excellency about you.
Maybe I can persuade him to keep you on.

MATE—He’s a good-hearted man.... I’d have spoken to him myself only——
[_With a hopeless gesture he indicates his tattered coat._] I couldn’t
let him see me in this condition.

JUHASZ—[_Grasps both lapels of his own coat; despairingly._] The man will
have the coat off my back!

MATE—[_Takes a protesting stride toward him._] But Mr. Juhasz ... you
don’t suppose that I——

JUHASZ—No, no ... but stop talking like that ... or I’ll have to take it
off.... Merciful heaven! To think that such poverty exists in our very
midst!

MATE—[_Weeping._] You have made a better man of me, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—There ... there, my boy ... don’t worry ... everything will be all
right.... Just rely on me.... I’ll take care of you. [_Puts an arm about
him; his voice quavers with tenderness and pity._] Come what may, I’ll
help you. [_The COUNT appears in the doorway at back._] We’ll overlook
what you have done ... and I’ll see to it that your wages are raised.
[_The COUNT enters. Seeing him, JUHASZ lets his arm fall from MATE’S
shoulder. There is a pause._]

COUNT—Is this the way you dismiss the man, Mr. Juhasz?

JUHASZ—[_In great embarrassment._] Your excellency....

COUNT—I gave you ten minutes to do it in. What time is it now?

JUHASZ—[_Involuntarily feels for his watch._] The ten minutes ... are up,
sir.

COUNT—Where’s your watch?

JUHASZ—My watch?... Er....

COUNT—You had it ten minutes ago. [_To MATE._] Have _you_ got it? [_MATE
nods, abashed._] Give it here. [_MATE gives it to him._] Now get out of
here. And don’t let me see your face about my place again. [_MATE slinks
out at left._] So you forgave him? [_JUHASZ is silent._] And promised to
raise his wages? [_JUHASZ is silent._] And gave him the watch you got
from me ten years ago?

JUHASZ—Excellency, I couldn’t help it.... I can’t bear to see people
suffer.

COUNT—Juhasz, you can’t stay here any longer. I’ll give you six months’
wages in lieu of notice.

JUHASZ—I don’t want to be paid for leaving.... I’ll go just the same....

COUNT—[_Crossly._] I can’t send you away without a kreutzer to your name!
What the devil _is_ one to do with you? Anyone else in your place would
have been thrown out bodily, but you!... [_Roars at him._] Am I to throw
you out because you have the disposition of a saint!

JUHASZ—You needn’t throw me out, sir. I’m going of my own account.

COUNT—[_Angrily._] Hold your tongue! You are too damned good for this
world!

JUHASZ—[_Pacifyingly._] You oughtn’t excite yourself, excellency....
There is really no need for it ... and you might bring on a stroke——

COUNT—It’s all very well to be soft-hearted and charitable and forgiving.
I’d like to be that way myself. But it’s a luxury I can’t afford.

JUHASZ—I’m no use around here.... I know that, sir——

COUNT—[_Shouts._] Don’t look at me like that! This is unheard of! I come
in with the fixed intention of giving you the sack, and here I am——
Unheard of! [_Angrier yet._] Now I’m the Juhasz! [_Roars._] Do you expect
me to send you away because you try to help everybody who is in trouble?

JUHASZ—A man like me does more harm around the place than a hundred lazy
workmen.... You mustn’t consider me, sir.... I’ll be all right. I’ll go
somewhere and wait until my money comes ... from Berlin. Then I’ll have
my shop back. [_He raises his eyes to the COUNT, then recollects that it
is forbidden._] I beg pardon. [_He turns his back._]

COUNT—Such credulity! Such optimism! [_Goes up to him._] You are the most
absurd old baby I ever—— You can look at me now ... you soft-hearted
[_JUHASZ looks at him_] old lamb, you.... The only thing to do with
you ... is ... hug you. [_Puts an arm affectionately around JUHASZ’S
shoulder. PAULA enters at right. Seeing her, the COUNT withdraws his arm.
There is a brief pause._] I’m a fine dismisser myself! [_To JUHASZ._]
Run along, my son ... go out to your pigeons ... and tell them that the
old master can’t eat his personal acquaintances either. [_JUHASZ flashes
PAULA a triumphant glance and exits quickly at left._]

PAULA—If I had come in a minute later you’d have been kissing him.

COUNT—Quite likely. It’s no use. I can’t get rid of him.

PAULA—I’ve thought of a way.

COUNT—To get him out of here?

PAULA—Yes, and of his own free will.

COUNT—It isn’t possible.

PAULA—It is. But it will cost a great deal.

COUNT—I’ll pay whatever it costs.

PAULA—Mr. Juhasz can have his shop back by paying fifty-one thousand
kronen to the attorney for his creditors.

COUNT—But, my dear, you said yourself that he’d never let me pay it for
him.

PAULA—Yes, but he is not to know that you are paying it.

COUNT—Who then——

PAULA—He must be made to believe that the money was sent by the person
from whom he’s expecting it. From Oscar Mezei ... in Berlin.

COUNT—I see. Not bad!

PAULA—Very simple. Have your cashier put fifty-one thousand kronen in an
envelope and with it a notification that the money comes from a Berlin
bank. Can he do that?

COUNT—[_Enthusiastically._] I’ll make him do it. And as soon as Juhasz
gets the money——

PAULA—He will hurry with it to the city ... to pay off his creditors ...
and take over his shop ... and stay in it.

COUNT—If we hurry, perhaps we can get him off by the noon train. I’ll see
the cashier at once. The whole thing shouldn’t take more than ten minutes
to fabricate.... You have made me very happy, dear. This clever plan
of yours is the first real intimation that you, too, want to be rid of
Juhasz.

PAULA—Rid of him! That’s a hideous way to put it.

COUNT—Put it as you like, the fact is there. It is perfectly natural for
me to be impatient ... but for you to be is ... charming.

PAULA—It isn’t impatience ... as much as ... uneasiness. When I look
at him ... sometimes ... I feel a twinge of doubt. When I see how
pathetically he tries to protect me ... from you ... I get a twinge of
remorse. It will be different when he has gone.... Yet I shouldn’t want
to see him go empty handed.... And neither would I want him ... ever to
find out that——

COUNT—Rely on me. The papers shall be forged carefully enough to deceive
a bank president. I’ll go to the cashier this minute.... Paula, you have
made me very happy. [_He takes her hand and kisses it._] If I were twenty
years younger I suppose I would have kissed you on that red, young mouth
of yours.

PAULA—Careful! Someone is coming.

COUNT—[_Still holding her hand; is about to kiss her._] No....

PAULA—I heard the outer door.

COUNT—Nonsense! [_As he bends toward her again JUHASZ enters at left._]

JUHASZ—Excellency, some of the pigeons have flown away.

COUNT—[_Does not resent this interruption; very jovially._] No matter,
Juhasz, they’ll come back. [_He exits at left. There is a pause._]

JUHASZ—He touched you.... He touched you with his hands.

PAULA—He kissed my hand.

JUHASZ—If I hadn’t come in he would have kissed your cheek. This can’t go
on, you poor child, you are in serious danger.

PAULA—Aren’t you exaggerating, Mr. Juhasz?

JUHASZ—Is it possible you don’t understand that he is trying to make you
his mistress?

PAULA—It takes two to make that bargain, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—Two to make it, but only one to repent it.... You don’t seem to
realize the game he is playing with you.

PAULA—He has always behaved like a gentleman with me.

JUHASZ—That is the most dangerous part of it. These rich people have such
fine manners ... they are like silkworms ... they spin a fine soft thread
around a poor girl ... and she never realizes what they are about ...
until one day she wakes up and finds herself ... dressed in silk.... But
I won’t let that happen to you. And the Count knows it. That is why he is
trying to get rid of me.

PAULA—Why, he loves you like a son. Just now he was embracing you.

JUHASZ—But he’ll send me away, sooner or later. I know that. And this is
what I want to say to you. Philip telegraphed that he is coming down to
see me this afternoon. I’m going back to the city with him. I might as
well before I’m driven out. And you are coming with me.

PAULA—I?

JUHASZ—Yes. You can’t stay here any longer. It is too dangerous for you.

PAULA—Dangerous! That’s perfectly absurd.

JUHASZ—Haven’t I seen and heard enough to know? All his advances! All his
proposals! Have you ever seen a little bird fluttering helplessly about
in a lion’s cage?

PAULA—No.

JUHASZ—Neither have I. But I imagine it must be like you are here.... I
am going to take you out of here, my child.

PAULA—That’s awfully good of you, Mr. Juhasz, but——

JUHASZ—Do you _want_ to stay here?

PAULA—I see no reason why I shouldn’t.

JUHASZ—I am the better judge of that. And I shan’t let you stay.

PAULA—I appreciate your motives, Mr. Juhasz. But pardon me if I say you
have no right to decide whether I may stay or go.

JUHASZ—No right? Didn’t I bring you here ... into this danger?

PAULA—Perhaps I came ... of my own accord.

JUHASZ—I see. His insidious poison has begun to work on you already.
Well, Paula, I won’t have it that way. You have never seen me determined
yet.... Perhaps I never was before.... But I am now.... Paula [_with a
burst of courage_], I’ll take you with me by force if necessary.

PAULA—I repeat ... you have no right to do that.

JUHASZ—[_At a loss for the moment._] No right ... no right?

PAULA—You are not my father ... or any relation of mine.

JUHASZ—I ... I....

PAULA—I used to work for you ... and I respect you deeply ... but apart
from that——

JUHASZ—I love you, Paula.

PAULA—Yes, but——

JUHASZ—You don’t understand, Paula. [_Pauses a moment before he repeats
very simply and earnestly._] I love you. [_A pause._] That is why I dared
to say such things. [_A pause._]

PAULA—Why, Mr. Juhasz——

JUHASZ—You are surprised.... You thought I kept watch over you quite
unselfishly ... like a brother.... Well, so I did ... at first.... I used
to pace up and down beneath the Count’s window ... all night long ...
without a thought in my mind except to keep you from harm.... Sometimes
I was tired and sleepy ... but there I stayed ... under his window ...
because it was my duty to protect you ... and then ... gradually ... I
began to realize ... that I liked to watch ... that I was never tired or
sleepy any more ... my whole attitude had changed ... but I didn’t tell
you.... I still pretended to be guarding you ... only because I had your
interest at heart ... while all the time it was because I loved you....
And now ... you can send me away, if you like.

PAULA—Mr. Juhasz ... I don’t know ... I really don’t know what to say.

JUHASZ—You never guessed it.

PAULA—I would never have believed it, if you hadn’t——

JUHASZ—I didn’t mean to tell you. But when you said I had no right ...
it slipped out.... I might have gone on pretending.... I don’t know....
But now I can ask you again ... to come with me ... if you will ... as my
wife. [_A pause._] Won’t you answer me?

PAULA—I have been pretending, too, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—You?

PAULA—I let you think I came here ... out of loyalty to you. But I
didn’t. I came because I wanted to come ... because I am bad and
depraved. And that is why I want to stay.... I am sick of poverty, Mr.
Juhasz.... I don’t want to go back to work in a dingy little office ...
of a dingy little shop.... I am young, Mr. Juhasz, and pretty.... I want
to do the things that make living worth while ... meet interesting people
... see beautiful places ... wear fine clothes ... enjoy the leisure and
luxury that only rich folks can have.... I have thought about such things
... and longed for them so fiercely ... that it makes me cold and sick
... only to think that I may not have them.... Oh, it’s so difficult to
tell you, Mr. Juhasz! My heart is so heavy!

JUHASZ—Do you ... love the count?

PAULA—No.

JUHASZ—Tell me the truth.... You can tell me now.

PAULA—He isn’t a man to me at all. He is only the door that leads into
a new life.... He is rich, Mr. Juhasz, rich, rich—— [_Hides her face in
shame on his shoulder._]

JUHASZ—[_Half dazed._] Come with me ... and I will be rich, too.... I
will work for you, Paula, as no man ever worked before.... There are
people who will help me.... I will be ambitious, grasping ... until I
have all the money you want....

PAULA—[_Still has her face buried in his shoulder._] And by the time you
had made your money I should be too old to want it.

JUHASZ—[_Bitterly._] After all, you are right, Paula. I am absurd.
Another man would offer to lay down his life for the woman he loved.... I
offer to open an account in a savings bank. [_She raises her head. There
is a knock at the door._] Come in. [_Louder._] Come in! [_SANTHA enters
at left, carrying an envelope and two receipts._]

SANTHA—Pardon me, Mr. Juhasz, but the cashier sent this in. Will you sign
this receipt, please?

JUHASZ—Yes.... I’ll be there in a moment.

SANTHA—You need only——

JUHASZ—Don’t you see I’m busy? Tell the cashier I’ll be there in a moment.

SANTHA—It isn’t necessary. Just take this, and sign. [_Proffers the
envelope and the receipts._]

JUHASZ—[_Looks at them._] Isn’t this an error?

SANTHA—It is addressed to you.

JUHASZ—[_Reads._] From the Deutsche Bank, of Berlin ... to the Ungarische
Allgemeine Credit-bank ... to the account of Mr. Peter Juhasz ... from
Mr. Oscar Mezei, of Berlin.... [_The hand holding the receipt sinks
slowly. JUHASZ himself sinks into a chair, then raises the receipt to his
eyes again, very slowly, as if his arm were tired._] From Oscar Mezei,
Berlin ... fifty-one thousand kronen. [_He looks into the envelope; sees
the sheaf of banknotes there._] Didn’t I tell you, Santha? I always said
he’d send it. But you all laughed at me.

SANTHA—Will you sign the receipt, please?

JUHASZ—[_Rather dazed._] Certainly. [_He signs._]

SANTHA—[_Takes the signed receipt; leaves the other in JUHASZ’S hand._]
You keep this one. It’s the duplicate.

JUHASZ—The duplicate ... yes. Where are you going?

SANTHA—To give this back to the cashier.

JUHASZ—Oh, yes. Thank you, Santha.

SANTHA—Don’t mention it, sir. [_He exits. There is a pause. JUHASZ stands
at left. PAULA is at extreme right. He looks at her, still balancing the
envelope full of banknotes on his palm._]

PAULA—I congratulate you, Mr. Juhasz. [_He is silent._] Now you can have
your shop back, and everything will be all right for you.

JUHASZ—[_Crosses to her._] Yes, Paula, now everything will be all right
for me. And for you, too. For now I can give you the things you want ...
fine clothes and beautiful places and all the rest.... Take it, Paula.

PAULA—Mr. Juhasz ... your shop, your creditors——

JUHASZ—What do I want the shop for now? Let the creditors sell it out.
There will be more than enough to pay them.

PAULA—But that means your livelihood, your entire future!

JUHASZ—I love you, Paula. It is _your_ future I am thinking of. You don’t
want to work in a shop ... or be a shopkeeper’s wife ... you want to
live in luxury ... well ... here is money. Take it. [_Forces it into her
hand._] There! Close your hand.... Spend it ... while it lasts ... and
then ... if you still want to go on living that way ... it will be easy
to get more money ... too easy for a pretty girl like you.... But if you
change your mind, Paula, if you change your mind, you can turn back ...
back to this ordinary life.... But if you took the Count’s money, there
could be no turning back.... Don’t you see?... For when a girl’s honor is
gone ... she can’t turn back.... And you will want to turn back.... I am
certain of that.... I know you, Paula.... You will want to turn back.

PAULA—[_Deeply moved._] You would do this for me? You would give me
everything you possess ... and ask nothing in return?

JUHASZ—[_Throwing it off, with a whimsical smile._] Everything I possess?
So it is. Let the Count do as much for you if he’s such a cavalier.
[_PAULA offers him the money, mutely._] No. We are going now ... we shall
both make the noon train to Budapest.... You will not stay here with the
Count.... I see it in your eyes ... in your tears.... You are saved,
little Paula, ... saved from your own folly. [_He has moved very close to
her and has one hand on her shoulder when the COUNT enters. JUHASZ drops
his hand. There is a pause._]

COUNT—Are you dictating, Juhasz?

JUHASZ—[_Cold, resolute but respectful._] I have had very good news,
your excellency. I am leaving on the noon express ... and ... [_looks
at PAULA_] Miss Paula will tell you the rest. [_Head high, very sure of
himself, he exits at right. There is a pause._]

COUNT—What’s the matter with the man? [_PAULA shows him the money._] I
don’t understand.

PAULA—He gave it to me.

COUNT—I said he was in love with you.

PAULA—Here! [_She offers him the money._]

COUNT—Why? What’s this for?

PAULA—It’s your money.

COUNT—No.... It belonged to Juhasz ... and if he gave it to you ... and
you accepted it....

PAULA—I didn’t accept it.... I was too overcome to speak. This money
means to him his shop, his future, the honor of his name ... and yet he
tossed it to me without a moment’s hesitation. I never knew a man could
love like that.

COUNT—What are you going to do with it?

PAULA—Give it back to him, of course.

COUNT—I wouldn’t do that.... He’d only try to give it back to you again,
or tear it up, or throw it away.... The man’s in love with you, you
know. ... I think it were wiser to send the money at once by telegraph
to the attorney for his creditors. Then we’ll be sure he will reap the
benefit of it. We must give him back his shop ... by force ... if that’s
the only way he’ll have it.

PAULA—You are right. You are perfectly right. I’ll give the money to the
cashier myself, and have him send it right off.

COUNT—I would.... Have you been crying, Paula?

PAULA—It wasn’t exactly amusing ... to have him offer to make a sacrifice
like that ... after all we had done to deceive him. [_JUHASZ enters at
right. He is carrying his hat and umbrella._]

JUHASZ—Doubtless your excellency knows everything. [_PAULA exits at
left._]

COUNT—No, Juhasz. All I know is that you got some money from Berlin.

JUHASZ—[_Proudly, firmly._] Yes, and thank God it came in time to rescue
that poor girl from your dishonorable attentions. She doesn’t need your
money now. She has mine, mine that was earned by hard, honest labor.

COUNT—Juhasz!

JUHASZ—I’m sorry to be compelled to speak to you like this, excellency.
God knows I am grateful to you for all you have done for me, but I am
leaving your house, and Paula is coming with me.

COUNT—She is going with you?

JUHASZ—Yes, your excellency.

COUNT—Do you think it wise to give her all your money?

JUHASZ—It was my own money. I do what I want with it.

COUNT—My dear Juhasz, you are riding a very high horse. I mention it only
because the fall is apt to be painful. Have you made sure that lady has
accepted your generous gift? [_PAULA enters quietly at left._]

JUHASZ—I don’t know what you mean.

COUNT—Perhaps it would be best to ask her.

JUHASZ—Paula, his excellency ... just said something ... I didn’t
understand.

PAULA—I couldn’t take it, Mr. Juhasz.... I couldn’t....

JUHASZ—Couldn’t take it?

PAULA—I have sent the money to Budapest ... by telegraph ... to the
attorney for your creditors. [_There is a pause. The COUNT exits at back
on tiptoe._] You didn’t give me a chance to speak before.... I appreciate
what you tried to do for me ... any woman would ... but I couldn’t let
you ruin yourself on my account.

JUHASZ—[_Puts the worst construction on her refusal._] He can give you
more.... That’s true enough! [_She does not answer. There is a pause.
SANTHA enters at back. Behind him comes PHILIP._]

SANTHA—There he is. [_SANTHA exits._]

PHILIP—Good morning, Mr. Juhasz. Did you get my telegram? [_He bows
curtly to PAULA._]

JUHASZ—I got it, Philip. How are you?

PHILIP—I met his excellency in the garden. He said I would find you here.
Am I interrupting?

JUHASZ—No, Philip. I was only saying good-bye to Miss Paula.

PAULA—[_Cordially._] Are you still angry with me, Philip?

PHILIP—[_Very earnestly; bows coldly._] Yes, I am. [_To JUHASZ._] I am
glad to hear that you are coming to Budapest. That’s what I came for. To
ask you to come to town for a day or two.

PAULA—How are things at the shop?

PHILIP—[_Ignoring her._] That’s really what I came for. I hope you don’t
mind my saying, Mr. Juhasz ... that business has been wonderful since you
went away. The receiver——

JUHASZ—Mr. Geiringer?

PHILIP—Yes.... Mr. Geiringer has been collecting all the old outstanding
accounts and keeping a sharp eye on the cash. He sent me down here to see
you, Mr. Juhasz. It seems he has fallen in love with the shop, and has
been wanting to buy it for himself. And when he found out that Mr. Oscar
had gone bankrupt in Berlin, he decided——

JUHASZ—What’s that? What did Mr. Geiringer find out?

PHILIP—That Oscar had gone into bankruptcy ... then he went straight to
the lawyer for your creditors.

JUHASZ—[_Excitedly._] Slowly, please. You say that Oscar went bankrupt in
Berlin?

PHILIP—Yes. Didn’t you know it?

JUHASZ—[_Looking at PAULA._] No.

PHILIP—I’m sorry to have been the first to tell you ... but everyone in
the city knows it.

JUHASZ—You are quite sure?

PHILIP—Well, his wife has been back in Budapest, living with her mother,
for the past two weeks.... And I see Oscar every day.

JUHASZ—Are they divorced?

PHILIP—No, but they are so hard up that they have to live at her mother’s
house.

JUHASZ—If that’s so, there has been a terrible mistake somewhere. [_He
looks again at PAULA; takes out the receipt, crosses to PHILIP._] Read
this.

PAULA—I’ll leave you alone. [_She starts for the door._]

JUHASZ—[_Takes her by the hand._] No, Paula, you will stay here, please.

PHILIP—[_Reading the notice._] The Deutsche Bank ... Oscar Mezei ...
fifty-one thousand kronen [_in great astonishment._] I can’t understand
this at all.... He had so little to show when they put him in bankruptcy
that he was lucky not to be sent to prison ... and since then he has
been wandering around Budapest in shabby clothes, borrowing a krone from
anybody who’d lend him.... Why, I lent him two myself the day before
yesterday. [_There is a pause._] Did this money really arrive?

JUHASZ—[_Has not taken his eyes off PAULA._] Yes.

PHILIP—I can’t make that out at all.

PAULA—You had to find out sooner or later, Mr. Juhasz.... The money
didn’t come from Oscar Mezei.... It didn’t come from Berlin.

JUHASZ—Where _did_ it come from?

PAULA—His excellency wanted to help you.... He sent you the money ... and
had those bank notices written here.

JUHASZ—Written here?

PAULA—Yes.... You see——

JUHASZ—You knew it all the time?

PAULA—I was happy to see you get your shop back, and——

JUHASZ—You knew it was all a pretext to get rid of me? You knew it wasn’t
my money?

PAULA—Yes, I knew it, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—And while I was saying those boastful things to you ... and
making sacrifices for you ... with another man’s money ... you were
inwardly laughing at me all the time.

PAULA—I cried, Mr. Juhasz.

JUHASZ—It wasn’t necessary to cry or to laugh, or to take all these
secret precautions to get rid of me. You need only have told me the
truth. [_On the terrace at back a servant girl appears. She is carrying
JUHASZ’S overcoat and bag. He sees her and turns to PHILIP._] Come,
Philip. [_His voice is low and trembling with sorrow and humiliation._]
Let us go. [_They start up toward the door._]

PAULA—Mr. Juhasz ... won’t you forgive me ... and shake hands ... before
you go?

JUHASZ—[_Going; does not look at her._] Good-bye, Miss Paula.

PAULA—Have you forgotten all you said to me? You are leaving me alone ...
alone with him. [_JUHASZ stops, turns to her slowly. Seeing this, she
gathers courage._] You are leaving me like this because your pride is
hurt. You don’t care any more ... what becomes of me.

JUHASZ—[_Opens his mouth, closes it again, wavers, then suddenly roars at
PHILIP, who has been looking on in blank amazement._] Why do you stand
there like a blockhead? Why don’t you take me away from here? Can’t you
see I am about to stay? [_PHILIP takes his arm and leads him out at
back: There is a pause. PAULA watches them go, then she crosses slowly
to the COUNT’S desk. In the garden, coming from the right, the COUNT
appears. He stands in the doorway a moment, looking off left, apparently
watching JUHASZ and PHILIP depart._]

COUNT—Can I believe my eyes? Is that really Juhasz going toward the
station? [_She does not reply. He comes in. On the threshold he glances
again off left._] If they hurry they can still catch the 12.05. It just
pulled in the station. [_Looks off left once more; comes down._] Well,
sunbeam! [_PAULA looks at him sorrowfully then lowers her eyes._] We are
alone.

PAULA—Alone.

COUNT—It is hard to realize he is really gone. I shall go on expecting
him to pop in that door any moment, or appear at the window, or crawl
from under the table.... It doesn’t seem possible that I’m free of him at
last ... that we are free.

PAULA—[_Sadly._] Free.

COUNT—But it’s true, little sunbeam, it’s true! No more dictation. No
more political speeches. No more interruptions.... Now all that remains
to be done is have the car overhauled ... telegraph to Vienna, Salzburg,
Paris ... for the best rooms in the best hotels ... for the most
exquisite frocks ... for the most magnificent cabin on the swiftest boat
to the most beautiful seaport in Spain.... [_Comes toward her ardently.
The whistle of the departing train is heard. PAULA jumps up as if someone
had called her, and makes an involuntary movement toward the door at
back._] His train. [_Angrily._] Is he to hinder me even now? It was just
as if he had called back to us. [_PAULA goes toward the door at right._]
Why, Paula! Where are you going?

PAULA—[_Stops at the typewriting machine._] To my work.... Unless your
excellency wishes to give me dictation.

COUNT—Dictation? Are you serious?

PAULA—Yes.

COUNT—But why?... Did anything happen ... between you and Juhasz?

PAULA—[_Softly._] Nothing happened. [_Starts to go._]

COUNT—[_In polite resignation._] No ... no ... wait ... I’ll dictate,
if I must. [_She sits at the machine. He repeats mechanically,
distrustfully._] I’ll dictate, if I must. [_Eyes her narrowly._]

PAULA—We stopped at “The deplorable policies inaugurated by the Minister
of Agriculture——”

COUNT—Deplorable policy ... yes. Well ... if I must ... go ahead ...
[_Sighs._] “The very deplorable policy ...”

PAULA—[_Writing._] Policy.

COUNT—“Inaugurated by the Minister ... leaves the farmer bewildered and
quite helpless.”

PAULA—[_As she writes, bows her head lower over the machine._] Helpless.

COUNT—“Now the farmer is devoted to the minister ...” [_His quick
expressive glance meets her eye as she looks up._] “... but the minister
does not love the farmer.”

PAULA—[_Writing._] Farmer.

COUNT—“And can the farmer be blamed for feeling abandoned and betrayed?”

PAULA—And betrayed.

COUNT—“But I, for one, know that his excellency, the minister of
agriculture ... belongs to the old school of honor ... to those who will
not abuse——”

PAULA—Abuse.

COUNT—“The faith that was placed in them.”

PAULA—The faith ... [_Stops writing suddenly._]

COUNT—“The farmer does not ask for sympathy. He wishes no allegiance that
is not conscientiously felt. Yet he hopes, yet he believes he still can
win the minister to——”

PAULA—[_Sorrowfully._] He mustn’t believe that, your excellency.

COUNT—Go on writing, Paula, that belongs in the speech.... And you may
add that I too think that it is a forlorn hope, a mistaken belief,
which the farmer must teach himself to renounce. [_PAULA bends over the
machine, puts her hand over her eyes._] What is it, my child? Don’t you
feel well?

PAULA—[_Rises._] I beg pardon, your excellency.... I have had the
strangest feeling ... since ... since he went away from here.... I
don’t know how to describe it.... I don’t know what it is. [_Her voice
is restrained, embarrassed._] But I really believe ... [_bursts out
angrily_] I’ve fallen in love with this Juhasz. [_She hurries out at
right. The COUNT stares after her a moment thoughtfully, lights a
cigarette, and as he flicks the ashes from it,_

THE CURTAIN FALLS




ACT THREE




ACT THREE


    SCENE—_The shop again. It is a sunny autumn morning. When the
    curtain rises JUHASZ is escorting the Insignificant Lady to the
    door, which PHILIP holds open for her._

UNASSUMING LADY—[_As she goes._] Thank you. I will telephone you on
Wednesday about noon, and if the materials have arrived I will come in
during the afternoon some time. Good day.

JUHASZ—Good day, madame.

PHILIP—Good day.

UNASSUMING LADY—[_To PHILIP._] Good day. [_She exits. PHILIP closes the
door. JUHASZ returns to the counter down right and begins clearing away._]

JUHASZ—[_Gloomily._] This place gets more like a graveyard every day.

PHILIP—I don’t see how you can say that, Mr. Juhasz. You’ve only been
back two weeks, and in those two weeks you have done more business than
you used to do in two months.

JUHASZ—[_Morosely._] Not enough to suit me.

PHILIP—It has become the fashion to buy here. Everybody in Budapest seems
anxious to help you.

JUHASZ—Because they are sorry for me. I don’t want them to be sorry for
me.

PHILIP—Nonsense! It’s because they like you. You ought to be very happy.

JUHASZ—I’m not happy. Do you understand? And I won’t be happy until I
have paid him back every heller he laid out for me.

PHILIP—At this rate it won’t take long.

JUHASZ—I haven’t slept in two weeks, and I shan’t sleep while I remain
under obligation to him.

PHILIP—I really don’t see why you are so angry with the Count. After all,
he did it for your good.

JUHASZ—He did it for his own good. And now he laughs at me ... he and ...
Paula.... [_The door opens. OSCAR stands irresolutely on the threshold.
He is shabby and crestfallen._]

OSCAR—Good morning.

JUHASZ—Good morning.

OSCAR—Good morning, Philip.

PHILIP—How do you do? [_Turns his back on OSCAR and, with ostentatious
delicacy, exits through the archway. There is a pause._]

OSCAR—He’s angry with me. [_A pause._] I hope ... you are not.

JUHASZ—No. [_He continues to clear away._]

OSCAR—I hope you don’t mind my coming here. I have several reasons for
coming. First, I consider it my duty....

JUHASZ—Please! You have no more duties where I am concerned.

OSCAR—Oh, but I have!

JUHASZ—Yes, I know. You can’t pay me.

OSCAR—Not at present. Unfortunately!... In the second place, I owe Philip
three kronen ... [_fumbles in his pocket_] that I want to pay him.... In
the third place, knowing what a kind heart you have——

JUHASZ—[_Impatiently._] Say what you have to say, and make it short. I am
busy.

OSCAR—[_With an ironic glance around the empty shop._] One would never
think it.

JUHASZ—Well, if it interests you, business is fine. I’ve done more in the
past two weeks than I used to do in two months. Yes!

OSCAR—Really? Really? I am very glad to hear it.

JUHASZ—[_Impatiently._] Well? Say what you have to say, and get it over
with.

OSCAR—Why, er ... to be brief ... I want a job.

JUHASZ—Where?

OSCAR—Here.

JUHASZ—With me? You want a job here?

OSCAR—Yes.

JUHASZ—[_Almost speechless with astonishment._] Well!... My dear man....
[_He comes around to the front of the counter, trying vainly to find
words to express his feelings._]

OSCAR—If you knew how poor we are——

JUHASZ—So ... so ... you take me for an utter idiot!

OSCAR—Please don’t say that ... please!

JUHASZ—You must. To ask me that.

OSCAR—I’ve been everywhere. I’ve been at Laszlo and Barna’s, at
Chellis’s, at Semlinger and Weiss’s, at Stein’s, at Brunner’s, at
Kramer’s, at Gold’s, at Reedo’s, at Kelamen’s ... every shop in town
... and they all know that I am the most competent man in the business
... but they all gave me the cold shoulder ... [_points accusingly at
JUHASZ_] ... on your account!

JUHASZ—On my account? That’s very likely!

OSCAR—It’s true. They all say they won’t have an employe who could abuse
the confidence of a man like you. Yes ... you can stare ... but it’s
true. You are keeping me out of a job.

JUHASZ—_I_ am?

OSCAR—If you were a plain, ordinary man ... like everyone else, nobody
would care what had happened between us....

JUHASZ—Now, really, this is——

OSCAR—I am practically boycotted, that’s what I am! Can I help it if you
are a saint? Wouldn’t I have fallen in love with your wife just the same
if you had been a scoundrel? Why should I be held answerable for your
virtues?

JUHASZ—No, that’s not fair.

OSCAR—I acted honestly and fairly toward you.

JUHASZ—Let us say you did.

OSCAR—And certainly Adele did.

JUHASZ—That’s true.

OSCAR—And _now_ look at me.... I had no supper last night, if you want to
know it.... Neither I nor your wife.

JUHASZ—When you can’t buy her supper, then she’s _my_ wife, eh?

OSCAR—Go on and joke about it.... But we went to bed without supper.

JUHASZ—But then ... she was _your_ wife.

OSCAR—Your jokes don’t alter the facts. You are responsible for this.

JUHASZ—For what?

OSCAR—For the fact that we are starving. For the fact that I am shabby.
And for ... [_raises his trousers leg_] the fact that my socks are in
holes.... And for the boycott against me.... But if you don’t care
whether your former wife starves or not—— [_JUHASZ reaches for his
purse. OSCAR puts out a firm, protesting hand._] No, my friend, no!
[_Heroically._] We don’t accept alms.... Believe me, you’d be the last
I’d come to for a job if I had only myself to consider. You can imagine
what I went through before I brought myself to the point of crossing your
threshold. And now if, after all, _you_ send me away too——

JUHASZ—[_Touched, but refitting his impulse._] Will it always be like
this?... Why can’t they let me be? [_Turns, comes down right, passes
behind the counter. PHILIP enters through the archway._]

OSCAR—[_Follows JUHASZ._] Well ... what do you say?

JUHASZ—[_Through his clenched teeth._] I can’t.... You mustn’t ask it of
me. I’ll do anything but that.... My dear fellow, you must see I can’t do
that....

OSCAR—[_Bends over the counter toward him._] Then, at least, will you
give me six pair of black socks? [_Raises his trousers leg._] Mine are in
tatters.

JUHASZ—Oh!

OSCAR—You won’t even do that for me?

JUHASZ—[_Impatiently._] Certainly I will.... [_Takes a box from the
shelves, throws it on the counter._]

OSCAR—You are not going to offer me those HBs.

JUHASZ—What kind do you want then?

OSCAR—You might at least give me KMs.

JUHASZ—I have no more KMs. They are all gone. [_Puts out another box._]
Here are some AWs. [_Opens the box._] They are very good. [_Shows him a
pair._]

OSCAR—Are you trying to tell _me_ these are good? [_Fingers them._]
Cobweb?

JUHASZ—Not at all. [_He feels them too._]

OSCAR—[_Feels them again._] Why, if I put these flimsy things on now
they’d be in holes before I got home.

JUHASZ—They don’t knit socks of steel wire, you know. [_The THOROUGH
YOUNG LADY enters._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Good morning. [_PHILIP, JUHASZ and OSCAR return
her greeting simultaneously. OSCAR, socks in hand, even bows and
smiles to her. She addresses OSCAR._] I’d like a dozen very fine men’s
handkerchiefs.

OSCAR—[_Sadly, pointing to PHILIP._] There, please.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Yes. [_She goes to PHILIP at the back counter._]

OSCAR—It’s enough to break your heart. [_He looks back at them enviously,
dangling the socks from his hand._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—[_To PHILIP._] Now I don’t want the kind that fade
when they are washed.

PHILIP—All our handkerchiefs are absolutely fast colors, madame. [_Puts
out a box full._] Won’t you sit down?

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Thanks. [_She sits and examines the handkerchiefs._]

PHILIP—These are batiste, madame, and these are French linen.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Haven’t you got these in a bigger size?

PHILIP—Yes, ma’am. [_Puts out another box._] These are bigger.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Are these the very largest?

PHILIP—[_Indicating others in the same box._] Those are larger.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Are these the largest you carry?

PHILIP—There is no larger handkerchief made, ma’am. [_He opens an
enormous handkerchief._]

JUHASZ—[_Impatiently._] Do you want these socks or not?

OSCAR—It’s enough to break your heart! Why doesn’t he show her the
Rumbergers?

JUHASZ—He knows what he’s doing. [_Impatiently._] Please don’t take up
any more of my time. You can have these if you want them.

OSCAR—These shoddy things!

JUHASZ—I can’t be bothered with you any longer.

OSCAR—You can’t palm them off on any customer, yet you expect me to take
them. Why, they are the worst quality in the shop! [_The DISSATISFIED
LADY enters._]

JUHASZ—Good morning. [_Leaving OSCAR, he goes to the back counter._]

DISSATISFIED LADY—[_Joins JUHASZ._] Good morning, Mr. Juhasz. I want to
look at some nice neckties. To-morrow is my husband’s birthday, and I
want to get him some for a surprise.

JUHASZ—Will you step this way, please?

DISSATISFIED LADY—He told me exactly the kind he wanted, and said I could
go as high as a hundred kronen.

JUHASZ—I see. A real surprise.

DISSATISFIED LADY—Yes.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—No, no, no ... not lilac.

JUHASZ—Instead of buying ready-made ones, why not select your patterns
and have them made up?

PHILIP—This is the newest color, Jerusalem blue.

DISSATISFIED LADY—You are sure you could get them out for me in time.

JUHASZ—Oh, yes. That would give you the choice of some very nice silks in
restricted patterns.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—This straw color is very attractive.

DISSATISFIED LADY—I might look at them.

JUHASZ—We never cut more than one tie of each pattern. Would you step in
here? [_He indicates the archway. The NERVOUS GENTLEMAN enters._]

PHILIP—Good day, sir.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Good day.

JUHASZ—[_To the NERVOUS GENTLEMAN._] Good day. Just a moment, sir.

PHILIP—[_To the THOROUGH YOUNG LADY._] These are Rumbergers. A very
well-known brand.

JUHASZ—[_Flashes OSCAR a look of triumph._] After you, madame. [_Follows
the DISSATISFIED LADY off through the archway._]

PHILIP—Will you have a seat, sir? I’ll be with you in just a moment.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Thank you. [_He remains standing at the counter,
right._]

PHILIP—Pastel green, pastel brown, pastel blue, pastel yellow.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—I don’t know what pastel is.

PHILIP—Pastel is four kronen fifty, madame.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—You haven’t got something about half pastel, have you.

PHILIP—Yes, we have. [_Puts out still another box. To the NERVOUS
GENTLEMAN._] Won’t you sit down, sir? Mr. Juhasz will be there in a
moment.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—That’s all right.

PHILIP—These are lighter ... two kronen apiece lighter. [_The NERVOUS
GENTLEMAN comes down to the end of the counter where OSCAR stands
disconsolately before the open box of socks, one pair still held in his
hand._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—And what about these darker shades? [_The NERVOUS
GENTLEMAN pokes in the box of socks._]

PHILIP—They are one krone fifty darker.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—I’d like something between the two.

PHILIP—[_Pulls down another box._] Between the two.

OSCAR—[_Deferentially._] Those are socks, sir.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—I see they are.

OSCAR—[_Very deferentially._] Would you like to look at some, sir?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Yes.

OSCAR—[_Shows the pair he is holding in his hand._] Black. Fil d’Ecosse.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—I’m afraid they are too expensive. Let me look at the
first ones again.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Looks at his watch._] I’m afraid I can’t wait.

PHILIP—One moment more, sir. Mr. Juhasz will be right in.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—I know what your moments mean. [_Picks up a sock._]

OSCAR—[_Ingratiatingly._] Mr. Juhasz will be right in, sir. Now here is
an exceptionally fine stocking, sir. [_Shows him the pair he has been
holding._]

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Compares it with the one he is holding._] Just the
same as this, isn’t it?

OSCAR—Just the same. Genuine Fil d’Ecosse.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Is it really good?

OSCAR—Absolutely. [_He is at the end of the counter now._]

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—It looks good.

OSCAR—You wouldn’t want a better sock, sir.

PHILIP—[_Who has been watching them; angrily._] Coming right away, sir.
One second more!

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Looks at him, then at OSCAR._] You ... work here?

OSCAR—Well ... not exactly, sir.... I ... I ... I’m a relation of Mr.
Juhasz’s.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Because I can’t wait any longer.

OSCAR—[_Goes swiftly behind the counter._] Then just let me wait on you,
sir ... until Mr. Juhasz comes. This is a fine quality, sir, absolutely
first class.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Will these tear easily?

OSCAR—[_Laughs._] These? These are the strongest Fil d’Ecosse made.
[_Pulls at the hose._] They’re like steel.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—They look good.

OSCAR—And they will feel good on the foot.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—I want a good quality.

OSCAR—[_Spluttering in his eagerness._] We sell nothing but first-class
goods, sir. You won’t find a more durable Fil d’Ecosse anywhere. My ...
my brother-in-law imports it direct from England.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—I’ll take some. Then I want some with colored clocks.

OSCAR—How many of these, sir?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Well, if they are really so good, give me a dozen pair.

OSCAR—Yes, sir. Twelve. [_Counts them briskly._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Do you mind letting me look at those first ones
again? [_The DISSATISFIED LADY and JUHASZ re-enter._]

DISSATISFIED LADY—[_Speaking as she enters._] ... and my husband is very
fond of bow ties, those gay ones they are wearing now. [_Comes down
left._]

JUHASZ—[_Without noticing OSCAR, he comes down to the table at left._]
The bow ties are here, madame. Considered very smart just now. Restricted
pattern, too. We only make up two or three of each. A man doesn’t like to
see the tie he is wearing ... [_Now he sees OSCAR, who has just climbed
up on a stool to reach some boxes on the top shelves. They look into
each other’s eyes across the shop. JUHASZ’S mouth remains open, the word
sticks in his throat, his hand, holding a necktie, remains poised in the
air._]

OSCAR—[_Quickly._] The gentleman couldn’t wait. He was about to walk out.
I didn’t want to see a customer walk out of the shop, so I just showed
him one or two things in a hurry.... I’d like to know about what size.
Will you show me your hand, please? [_The NERVOUS GENTLEMAN extends his
hand. OSCAR, looks at JUHASZ again, greatly flustered, takes the NERVOUS
GENTLEMAN’S hand, shakes it cordially._] How do you do? [_He stares at
JUHASZ anxiously._]

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—What do you say?

OSCAR—Oh, pardon me! ... Will you close your hand, sir? [_The NERVOUS
GENTLEMAN extends his fist. OSCAR measures a sock over it._] These are
just right.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—[_To PHILIP._] Let me see? Will they wear?

JUHASZ—[_To the DISSATISFIED LADY._] A man doesn’t like to see the same
tie he is wearing on somebody else. [_He is still staring at OSCAR._]

OSCAR—[_Rapidly._] Three pair.... Yes, sir. And a dozen of these ... and
now—— [_Scans the shelves._] Long black Fil d’Ecosse with clocks. [_Takes
down a box and throws it on the counter._] These are really excellent.
[_Opens the box in feverish haste, shows the socks._] We are the only
ones in the city who carry them.... You can do almost anything to this
stocking without harming it ... boil it, bake it, soak it in lye, in
alcohol, in vitriol.... May I see your hand again?

DISSATISFIED LADY—[_Who has been rummaging in the box, now has several
neckties in her hand._] These aren’t bad.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Extends his fist._] It’s socks I want, you know, not
gloves.

OSCAR—Ha, ha, ha! That’s good! [_Measures._] These are exactly right.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Sure they won’t be too small?

OSCAR—Perhaps just a half size larger. [_Turns to the shelves again._]

PHILIP—The color won’t run if they are washed in lukewarm water.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Are you quite sure? [_The NERVOUS GENTLEMAN takes the
socks from OSCAR and inspects them._]

DISSATISFIED LADY—These aren’t exactly what I wanted either, but I’ll
take them. How much does it all come to?

JUHASZ—[_Still watching OSCAR. His voice trembles._] Seven kronen.... And
these are five-fifty ... these long ones ... nine kronen eleven.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—What did you say these were?

DISSATISFIED LADY—I’m sure my husband won’t like them.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—[_Rises._] Yes, perhaps I had better look at them
too.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—And now I want a couple of pair with some sort of
design, not clocks.

OSCAR—Stars, circles, dots, triangles, squares, circles, stars, squares,
dots——

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Some very quiet design.

OSCAR—[_Contemplates the shelves._] Quiet, quiet ... Just a moment, sir.
I’ll bring it right here. [_He hurries off through the archway._]

DISSATISFIED LADY—These are rather good. But I only see one.

JUHASZ—There must be more. [_He rummages in the box._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Now, if you don’t mind, we will go over the lot from
the beginning. Seeing so many kinds gets one all confused.

PHILIP—Just as you say, madame.

OSCAR—[_Re-enters with a box._] How do you like these, sir? [_Puts it on
the counter._]

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Too loud. Much too loud. I want something very quiet.

OSCAR—[_Greatly perturbed._] If I only knew where they were. [_In
perplexity._] Quiet, quiet, quiet ... [_Looks at PHILIP._] If I only knew
where those ... [_As PHILIP ignores him, he raises his voice._] They used
to be kept here on the third shelf.

JUHASZ—[_Grudgingly, angrily._] Fourth shelf ... on the end. [_PHILIP
angrily bangs a box down on the counter._]

OSCAR—My God! [_Startled, puts his hand over his heart._] Thank you,
thank you, sir! ... On the end ... [_Transported with joy._] Very kind of
you, sir! [_He is almost weeping._] Fourth shelf ... on the end. Thank
you, sir!

DISSATISFIED LADY—[_Who has by this time accumulated a handful of
neckties._] That will be all. ... Just these ten.

JUHASZ—[_Going to the cashier’s desk._] We will send them this afternoon,
madame.

DISSATISFIED LADY—How much do I owe?

JUHASZ—Five times seven ... and five times five fifty.... Sixty-two fifty.

DISSATISFIED LADY—[_Gives him a hundred krone note._] If you please.

JUHASZ—[_Has gone behind the cashier’s desk._] Sixty-two fifty. [_Rings
the cash register, makes change._] And fifty are sixty-three, ninety, one
hundred. Thank you.

DISSATISFIED LADY—This afternoon without fail.

OSCAR—[_Raises his head._] 16 Nador Street, Fourth Floor, Apartment 1.

DISSATISFIED LADY—That’s right. Good day. [_She exits. JUHASZ escorts her
to the door, closes it after her, turns, glares at OSCAR and comes toward
him slowly._]

OSCAR—[_Watches him come, fearfully, as if he expected to have his ears
boxed._] One with blue stars, these with the white squares, and would you
like these violet dots, and these with the very dainty circles, and
these....

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Hold on. I only want three. Let me see. [_He examines
the socks. JUHASZ passes them slowly, and goes to the THOROUGH YOUNG LADY
whom PHILIP is showing a bath-robe._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—It looks like a night-gown.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Put these three aside.

JUHASZ—[_Who is standing now between the two counters._] Show the lady
those hooded robes.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Rises._] And now quickly, for I am late, a white cap,
please.

OSCAR—[_Looks at JUHASZ._] A white cap.

JUHASZ—[_Looks at OSCAR sternly._] _I’ll_ get it for the gentleman. [_He
exits through the archway._]

OSCAR—[_Crestfallen._] The chief will bring it right in, sir. [_There is
a pause. OSCAR rubs his hands._] We have some very nice neckwear.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—I don’t need any, thanks.

OSCAR—Tennis shoes?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Thank you, no.

OSCAR—Sport shirts?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Nervously._] Don’t need any. I need a white cap.
Nothing else. [_A brief pause._]

OSCAR—Belts?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—No.

OSCAR—[_With a furtive glance at PHILIP._] Bathrobes? [_The NERVOUS
GENTLEMAN shakes his head._] White gaiters?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Sharply._] Thank you, no! [_Rises._] I asked for a
white cap. [_A brief pause._]

OSCAR—Nice walking stick?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Crossly._] No ... A cap is what I asked for.

OSCAR—[_Offended._] It will be here right away. [_Crosses to the table
down left, takes a stick from the rack which stands there, flourishes
it._] This is a very unusual stick, sir.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—I said I didn’t want one.

OSCAR—Yes, sir. [_He flourishes the stick, demonstrating its lightness.
The NERVOUS GENTLEMAN sullenly watches him balancing it, bending it,
testing its suppleness._]

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Let me see.

OSCAR—[_Gives it to him._] Light as a feather.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Balances and bends it._] I don’t need it. [_Returns
it to OSCAR._] I have more sticks now than I can use.

OSCAR—Just as you say, sir. [_JUHASZ re-enters with the cap._]

JUHASZ—Here you are, sir. White flannel.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—That’s right. [_Puts it with his other purchases._] A
dozen black socks, a dozen with clocks, these three figured ones, and the
cap.

JUHASZ—Shall we send them?

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—4 Sas Street ... Lissauer.... With the bill.

JUHASZ—[_Makes a note of it._] Yes, sir.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—[_Pulls the stick out of OSCAR’S hand._] What does this
stick cost?

OSCAR—Twenty-four kronen.

NERVOUS GENTLEMAN—Oh, put it on the bill too. Good day. [_He exits with
the stick._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—No monogram. Just two letters.

  PHILIP—[_Writing._] What letters?                }
                                                   }
  THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—R. S.                        }
                                                   }
  PHILIP—R. S.                                     }
                                                   }
  THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—In white, please.            } [_Simultaneously._]
                                                   }
  PHILIP—White letters.                            }
                                                   }
  OSCAR—[_Rushes off through the archway, calling  }
  to the bookkeeper._] Charge Lissauer with        }
  twenty-four kronen more for a cane.              }

[_JUHASZ begins to replace the boxes on the shelves down right. PAULA
enters from the street. She is very beautifully dressed._]

PAULA—Good morning. [_She comes slowly down to JUHASZ. PHILIP looks up,
stares at her in blank amazement._]

JUHASZ—[_Pauses in the act of lifting a big box._] Good morning. [_There
is a pause._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—And now let us go over them once more to see if they
are all here. How many should there be?

PHILIP—[_Confused._] Just as you say.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—How many?

PHILIP—Oh! How many? Forty-eight.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Let us count them over. [_They count._]

PAULA—[_Extends her hand to JUHASZ._] How are you, Mr. Juhasz?

JUHASZ—[_Puts down the box._] Thank you ... very well. [_Extends his hand
to her over the counter._] Won’t you sit down?

PAULA—[_After a pause._] I can hardly believe it is only two weeks since
I saw you.

JUHASZ—That’s not a very long time.

PAULA—No. [_She looks at him._] I’ve come ... I’ve come to buy a few
things.

JUHASZ—How odd!

PAULA—Odd?

JUHASZ—For you to come here ... as a customer.

PAULA—Yes, as a customer. [_A pause._]

JUHASZ—I shall be happy to give you satisfaction ... as a customer.
Perhaps ... I ought to make things a bit cheaper for you.

PAULA—I don’t want things cheaper, thank you. ... Why do you look at me
like that?

JUHASZ—You came in so ... unexpectedly.... Have you got leave of absence?

PAULA—Oh, I’m not at Gerelypuszta any more. I’m back in town again. So is
the Count. That is, he’s at Monte Carlo just now.

JUHASZ—Monte Carlo. Great railway junction. Gambling casinos.

PAULA—No. He has gone there to shoot pigeons.

JUHASZ—He never used to like that kind of sport.

PAULA—He is passionately fond of it now.... Ever since you went away.
When he hears that there is to be a slaughter of pigeons somewhere he
rushes to the spot.... I was supposed to have gone to Monte Carlo with
him, but I didn’t.

JUHASZ—You didn’t go.

PAULA—No. I had too many things to attend to at home first. [_Takes off
her gloves, produces a list._] There are so many things I want, and they
are so hard to get here.

JUHASZ—Hard ... here ... Yes.... Very hard. [_There is a pause._] And
what is it you wish, Miss Paula?

PAULA—[_Sits, consults her list._] You used to have some very fine French
pajamas for ladies. How well I remember them! They are a hundred kronen
the pair, aren’t they?

JUHASZ—Yes.

PAULA—How many have you left?

JUHASZ—I still have them all. Eight pair.

PAULA—I’ll take them all.

JUHASZ—[_Astounded._] You?

PAULA—Yes, please. And to save time won’t you get your pencil and take
down my whole order? I want it sent ... with the bill, as soon as
possible, please. I shall be in town only a few days more. The address is
128 Andrassy Street.

JUHASZ—[_Writes._] What apartment?

PAULA—The whole second floor.

JUHASZ—[_Writes, greatly bewildered._] Eight pajamas. Whole second floor.

PAULA—[_Reads from her list._] Twenty-four white neckties.

JUHASZ—For yourself?

PAULA—No, for my butler. I like him to wear a fresh tie every day.

JUHASZ—[_Writes; his voice trembles._] Twenty-four white ties for butler.

PAULA—Twenty-four pair of white lisle gloves.

JUHASZ—[_Writes._] For the butler?

PAULA—No, for my page boy.

JUHASZ—[_Writes._] Page boy.

PAULA—And some gloves for myself. Those motoring gloves ... with the ends
like a funnel.... You know what I mean.

JUHASZ—Gauntlets.

PAULA—Gauntlets, yes.

JUHASZ—[_Writes disconsolately._] Gauntlets.

PAULA—[_Sighs._] Gauntlets.

JUHASZ—But ... they are only worn for driving.

PAULA—I drive my own car.

JUHASZ—[_Sits down._] A big car?

PAULA—It’s standing out front.... Fifty horse-power.

JUHASZ—Fifty? [_Writes._] Gauntlets.... How many pair? ... Fifty?

PAULA—Six will be plenty until I get to Paris. I can buy more there if I
need them. You can get everything in Paris.

JUHASZ—Yes.... You can get everything in Paris.... A wonderful city.

PAULA—But so far to motor to.... I’m afraid the journey will be tiresome.

JUHASZ—You won’t be bored.... You probably aren’t going alone....

PAULA—Certainly not.

JUHASZ—Your mother?

PAULA—No. Mother is in Vienna, but from there she is going on to
Wiesbaden to wait for us. We will pick her up on our way home.

JUHASZ—[_Earnestly, aroused._] Is there anything the matter with your
mother?

PAULA—Her health, you mean? No. She’s only going to Wiesbaden to play
cards. [_There is a pause. She reads from her list._] Could you have a
footman’s cap made up for me quickly?

JUHASZ—Footman?

PAULA—I’ve been so annoyed about his cap. The one he brought with him was
all covered with gold braid. He looked just like a hotel doorman. What I
wish you’d get for me is something discreet and in good taste, something
suitable for a private dwelling.

JUHASZ—A private dwelling....

PAULA—Yes. For a lady living alone.

JUHASZ—[_Tremblingly writes._] Footman ... cap ... private dwelling....
I’ll look around at the cap-maker’s.

PAULA—I shall be awfully obliged. [_She rises. There is a pause._]

JUHASZ—[_Rises._] Not at all. It’s I who am obliged.

PAULA—[_Meets his eyes steadily._] Why do you look at me so strangely?

JUHASZ—[_Looks down at his list._] I’m pleased to see how clever you have
been.... Butler, motor car, private dwelling, white gloves. I didn’t
know....

PAULA—You didn’t know?

JUHASZ—No.

PAULA—But ... the whole city knows——

JUHASZ—Let us not talk about that, Paula. The important thing is that you
are happy. Is his excellency well?

PAULA—[_Nervously._] He is a perfect gentleman. One must say that for him.

JUHASZ—Certainly.

PAULA—After he had gone to the trouble and expense of buying and
furnishing a whole house for me.... You probably know the place ... that
little mansion in Biedermeyer style that belonged to the late Count
Schattenheim....

JUHASZ—Yes....

PAULA—He bought it for me and furnished it beautifully and then he had
the tact to go off to Monte Carlo. And when he got there he sent me a
thousand-word telegram.

JUHASZ—A thousand. That’s a lot of words.

PAULA—A telegram to the effect that he had gone off because he didn’t
wish to influence my decision in any way.... I must be free to shape my
own destiny, he said.... The mansion was mine ... on the day that ... of
my own free will ... I entered it. On the desk in my boudoir ... he said
... I would find a telegram already written and addressed. It consists of
a single word, “Come.” ... Twenty-eight hours after I send that telegram
he will knock on my door.... So far ... that is all that’s happened....
Tactful of him, wasn’t it?

JUHASZ—Very.

PAULA—That was ten days ago.

JUHASZ—Yes?

PAULA—[_More and more nervously._] I haven’t sent the telegram yet.
[_There is a pause._]

JUHASZ—[_More and more calmly._] I can imagine how eagerly he must be
awaiting it.

PAULA—He said he would wait fourteen days. I have four days left....

JUHASZ—From what you ordered here, I observe——

PAULA—[_Sharply._] I haven’t sent the telegram yet. [_A pause._]

JUHASZ—One needs time for everything.

PAULA—I have four days left. [_Nervously._] And as the last day draws
nearer ... I have been wondering ... because you have always been so good
to me ... what _you_ would think about it.

JUHASZ—I should consider it very clever of you.

PAULA—Are you advising me to do it?

JUHASZ—I am reconciling myself to the idea.

PAULA—You ... you would despise me, Mr. Juhasz, wouldn’t you?

JUHASZ—How can you suppose such a thing?

PAULA—You see how....

JUHASZ—I see how clever you are. And how happy you will be.

PAULA—[_Sharply._] I’ll send it off ... this afternoon.

JUHASZ—Then the Count ought to receive it to-night.

PAULA—Yes.

JUHASZ—I can imagine ... how happy he will be.

PAULA—Yes. He loves me ... very much.

JUHASZ—I know. [_There is a pause. The PATIENT LADY enters._]

PATIENT LADY—Good morning.

PHILIP—Good morning, madame. I’ll be with you in a moment.

PAULA—[_Sulkily._] I don’t want to detain you. Good-bye, Mr. Juhasz.
[_She extends her hand. He takes it._]

JUHASZ—Good-bye. [_OSCAR enters through the archway. The PATIENT LADY
goes to him._]

PAULA—There is something I forgot.

JUHASZ—Yes?

PAULA—You used to have a certain French perfume.

JUHASZ—Yes.

PAULA—It seems to me it was called “Exquisite heur.” A very strong,
sensuous perfume. A perfume for bad women.

JUHASZ—Oh!

PAULA—At least you said only bad women would use it, and even they ...
only for ... the most intimate occasions.

JUHASZ—[_Wincing._] Yes, I have some left.

PAULA—I’ll have a bottle, please.... Two bottles....

JUHASZ—You are a bit cruel, Paula. You might at least have bought _that_
somewhere else.

PAULA—I’d rather buy it here.

JUHASZ—As you like. [_To OSCAR._] The lady wants some perfume.
[_OSCAR takes his place._] That penetrating stuff.... Exquisite heur.
[_Sharply._] That perfume for harlots! [_To the PATIENT LADY._] What can
I show you, madame?

OSCAR—Yes, sir.

PATIENT LADY—I’d like to look at some scarfs, Mr. Juhasz. And a nice
sweater.

JUHASZ—Shall we look at the sweaters first? [_Indicates the archway._]
Will you step in here, please? [_She exits through the archway. He
follows her. PAULA stares thoughtfully after them._]

OSCAR—[_Shrilly._] Exquisite heur?

PAULA—[_Starts._] For mercy’s sake ... you?

OSCAR—It’s me.

PAULA—Mr. Oscar! You here again?

OSCAR—I’m here, but I’m not Mr. Oscar any more. [_He goes quickly to
the table down left, selects a bottle of perfume, gives it to her._]
Exquisite heur. [_Crosses right, behind the counter._]

PAULA—[_Shakes her head._] What are you doing here?

OSCAR—[_Cheerfully._] My affairs didn’t go so well.

PAULA—Where is Mrs.——

OSCAR—She’s _my_ wife now.

PAULA—And Mr. Juhasz took you back? You must have begged him on your
knees.

OSCAR—That wouldn’t have done any good. You have to know how to handle
him. There were a lot of customers here, and I started right in waiting
on one. Pure psychology! I know Mr. Juhasz backwards.... He hasn’t got
the heart to throw anybody out.... Is there anything else I can get you?

PAULA—No, thank you. [_The OLD GENTLEMAN enters._]

OLD GENTLEMAN—Good morning.

OSCAR—Good morning, professor. [_To PAULA._] See you again. [_To the OLD
GENTLEMAN._] What can I do for you, sir?

OLD GENTLEMAN—I want a pair of inexpensive gloves.

OSCAR—Inexpensive. Yes, sir. What kind? Won’t you sit down?

OLD GENTLEMAN—Swedish. Size nine and a half. Dark gray. [_Sits at about
the middle of the right counter._]

OSCAR—[_Lays out a box._] Dark gray. Swedish. Nine and a half. [_To
PAULA, who is crossing slowly to the table down left._] See you again
some time. [_To the OLD GENTLEMAN._] How do you like these? [_Opens and
expands a pair._]

OLD GENTLEMAN—Are they Swedish?

OSCAR—Why, old Heinrich Ibsen himself wasn’t as Swedish as these gloves
are.

OLD GENTLEMAN—Ibsen was a Norwegian.

OSCAR—I said he wasn’t as Swedish! Ha, ha! [_Passes over the gloves.
JUHASZ and the PATIENT LADY enter through the archway._]

PATIENT LADY—[_As she enters._] Now about the scarfs.

JUHASZ—[_Comes down to the table._] They are here, madame. [_Shows her
one._] They are quite new.

PATIENT LADY—I saw some like these at Braun’s some time ago.

OSCAR—Not like those you didn’t, madame, not like those! [_He is forcing
a glove on the OLD GENTLEMAN’S hand._] Now push, push hard!

JUHASZ—[_Has passed to the end of the counter down right._] Here are some
in plain colors. [_Puts out a box._] They are in much better taste. Sit
down, please. [_The PATIENT LADY sits at the counter. JUHASZ is behind
it. PAULA, at the table down left, is looking at him sulkily._]

OSCAR—Push, professor, push! [_Helps him._]

OLD GENTLEMAN—If I do it will burst.

OSCAR—Don’t you care.

OLD GENTLEMAN—Better stretch it a bit more.

  OSCAR—Let it burst, professor. A glove oughtn’t  }
  to be stretched too much. It will go on your     }
  hand all right.                                  } [_Simultaneously._]
                                                   }
  JUHASZ—This dark green isn’t bad. Or do you      }
  prefer this gray and black?                      }

[_PAULA takes off her gloves. Then her hat. Throws them determinedly on
the table. All look at her._]

OSCAR—[_Loudly, quickly, to bridge the uncomfortable silence which
ensues._] Perhaps we _had_ better take a half size larger, professor.
Just one moment....

  PHILIP—[_Joins in loudly._] This isn’t           }
  expensive at all, if you consider the            }
  quality....                                      }
                                                   }
  OSCAR— ... to try this size. It doesn’t matter   }
  if they fit a bit easy. Better that way than     }
  too snug.                                        }
                                                   }
  PHILIP—You can’t get quality without paying for  }
  it. We have a customer, an old gentleman, who    }
  always says “The cheapest is dearest in the      }
  long run.” And he’s quite right. I believe that  } [_Loudly and
  if you....                                       } simultaneously._]
                                                   }
  OSCAR—Or we will stick to the eight and a half   }
  if you like. They aren’t so very tight. Some     }
  people prefer them that way. It’s all a matter   }
  of taste.                                        }
                                                   }
  JUHASZ—[_Joins in shrilly._] This is pure        }
  lamb’s wool and that makes it warmer than        }
  another scarf twice its weight.... And it’s      }
  fashionable too.... We carry all the plain       }
  colors, but the striped ones come only in two    }
  shades, gray against a black ground or....       }

[_Meantime PAULA has gone to the cashier’s desk, glanced back at JUHASZ
once more, and now, with a petulant stamp of her foot, she goes behind
the desk. A sudden silence falls. She rolls up her sleeves and sits in
the cashier’s place. Her face is resolutely set. OSCAR, PHILIP and JUHASZ
watch her, aghast._]

  PHILIP—It is always a good plan to buy the       }
  best, for it gives the most satisfaction and     }
  lasts the longest....                            }
                                                   } [_Simultaneously,
  OSCAR—They may be uncomfortable for a day or     } softly, stammering;
  two, but then they begin to conform with the     } all begin at
  shape of your hand, and you are glad you....     } the same time._]
                                                   }
  JUHASZ—You will find these very practical for    }
  cold weather. And they are ideal for skating in  }
  winter. Both men and women wear them....         }

[_He is greatly distressed; his voice trembles._] We often sell several
of these to the same customer ... three or four at a time ... even more
... I recommend them highly, madame. [_There is a pause. PAULA sits
obstinately behind the cashier’s desk._]

OSCAR—Just push a little harder, please. [_He helps the OLD GENTLEMAN._]
Push, push!

PATIENT LADY—I’ll take these three. What do they cost?

JUHASZ—[_His voice trembles._] Forty kronen each, madame.

PATIENT LADY—[_Rises._] Send them, please. [_Fumbles in her purse._]
Three times forty.... One hundred and twenty.

JUHASZ—Yes. One hundred and twenty.

PATIENT LADY—After all, I think two will be plenty.... Let me see which
two. [_They compare the scarfs._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—[_Rises._] What does it all come to? [_She has money
in her hand._]

PHILIP—Three hundred and ten kronen, madame.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—[_Turns toward the cashier’s desk._] Three hundred
and ten. [_She is about to go to PAULA._]

PHILIP—[_Loudly, harshly._] No, no! [_She turns to him in surprise._] You
can pay me, please.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—Not the cashier?

PHILIP—[_With conviction._] No. [_She pays him._]

PHILIP—Thank you, madame. Three hundred and ten. I’ll get them out for
you Thursday without fail.

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—I think that’s everything. If I find I have forgotten
anything I’ll come in again to-morrow morning. Good day.

PHILIP—[_Sees her to the door._] Good day, madame.

PAULA—[_Echoes his salutation, very loudly._] Good day! [_PHILIP gives
her a disdainful glance and returns to the back counter where he begins
to clear away._]

PATIENT LADY—One is prettier than the other.... Oh, well, send the three
of them. Three times forty ... [_takes out money_] makes one hundred and
twenty.

JUHASZ—[_Uneasily._] One hundred and twenty.

PATIENT LADY—[_With a glance at PAULA._] Do I pay the cashier?

JUHASZ—[_Very uncomfortable._] Perhaps ... it’s all the same ... you had
better pay me.

PATIENT LADY—[_Puts the money down._] One hundred and twenty.

JUHASZ—One hundred and twenty. Thank you, madame. [_Puts the money in his
pocket._] They will be delivered this afternoon.

PATIENT LADY—Thank you. Good day. [_Goes to the door._]

JUHASZ—Good day, madame.

PHILIP—[_Holds the door open for her._] Good day.

PAULA—[_Emphatically, with a bow._] Good day! [_The PATIENT LADY exits._]

PHILIP—[_To PAULA, with an inflection of contemptuous amazement._] Good
day? [_The ARISTOCRATIC LADY enters._]

PAULA—Good day.

PHILIP—[_Very cordially._] Good day.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_To PHILIP._] What about my raincoat?

PHILIP—We are expecting it from Vienna any day, madame.

OLD GENTLEMAN—[_Takes the package which OSCAR has made up for him._] What
do I owe?

OSCAR—Twenty-four kronen.

OLD GENTLEMAN—I suppose you can change a thousand.

OSCAR—[_Hesitates, leans over the counter, looks from PAULA to JUHASZ,
then calls._] I ... eh ... a thousand?... Oh, Mr. Juhasz! The gentleman
wants to know if we can change a thousand. [_There is a painful silence._]

PAULA—[_Rises, addresses the OLD GENTLEMAN sweetly._] Certainly, sir.

OSCAR—Just a moment, sir. [_The OLD GENTLEMAN, on the point of going to
PAULA, pauses, in surprise._]

JUHASZ—[_In great perplexity._] How much does the gentleman pay?

OSCAR—[_Leaning far out over the counter, looks from JUHASZ to PAULA then
back again._] Twenty-four.

JUHASZ—[_After a short inward struggle._] Cash! Twenty-four out of a
thousand! [_The OLD GENTLEMAN goes to PAULA, pays her._]

PAULA—[_Ecstatically._] Twenty-four out of a thousand. [_Rings the
register loudly, opens the drawer._] Twenty-four and six make thirty ...
fifty ... one hundred ... two ... five ... and five are one thousand.
Thank you, sir.

OLD GENTLEMAN—Good day.

PAULA—Come and see us again.

OLD GENTLEMAN—[_Has gone to the door, counting his change, now turns._]
Look here! You gave me a hundred too much. [_Returns a banknote to her._]

PAULA—[_In confusion._] Oh, I beg your pardon.

OLD GENTLEMAN—That’s all right. I never mind getting too much. [_He
exits, chuckling over his joke._]

OSCAR—[_Has replaced the boxes on the shelves._] No matter. Such things
happen. [_He goes out through the archway._]

PHILIP—[_To the ARISTOCRATIC LADY._] Shall we look at the Burberrys?

JUHASZ—[_To the ARISTOCRATIC LADY._] That coat from Vienna should arrive
to-night at the latest.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—Am I mistaken? That man who just went in there....
Wasn’t that ... Oscar?

JUHASZ—Yes.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—Is he back here again?

JUHASZ—He’s ... helping out.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_Stares at PAULA._] Helping out?... and ... this is
the young lady who used to be here, isn’t it?

PAULA—[_Ironically sweet._] Yes, madame, the same young lady.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—Come, Mr. Philip, let us look at the Burberrys, and you
can tell me all about it. [_Sees that JUHASZ is about to follow her._]
Don’t you bother, Mr. Juhasz. We’ll manage without you. [_She and PHILIP
exit through the archway. JUHASZ stands rigid, mute. A cabman enters from
the street, whip in hand._]

CABMAN—Beg pardon, lady.... Have you forgot me? You said I wouldn’t have
to wait long.

JUHASZ—[_Thrusts his hand in his pocket._] How much do you get?

CABMAN—Three kronen.

JUHASZ—Here are six for you.

PAULA—Nothing of the kind. [_Opens the drawer of the register._] Three
kronen fifty are plenty. [_Gives the money to the CABMAN._] There you
are. [_The CABMAN looks at the money, then at JUHASZ and at PAULA._] What
are you waiting for?

CABMAN—[_Disappointed, surly._] All right, all right. I’m going. [_Gives
her a withering glance and exits. There is a brief pause._]

JUHASZ—What about the motor?

PAULA—That was it.

JUHASZ—Fifty horse-power.

PAULA—Only one horse-power.

JUHASZ—[_Goes to the cashier’s desk._] Then ... the motor is in the
garage?

PAULA—In the moon.

JUHASZ—That’s far off.

PAULA—Far off.

JUHASZ—Shall I telephone now about the footman’s cap?

PAULA—Don’t bother. The footman has his cap.

JUHASZ—Has he?

PAULA—But he hasn’t got a job.

JUHASZ—How’s that?

PAULA—Because there is no mansion for him to work in. While I sat over
there ... [_points to the counter_] there might have been.

JUHASZ—Gauntlets?

PAULA—Shan’t need any.

JUHASZ—Twenty-four pair of white gloves.

PAULA—That’s twenty-three too many. I do need one pair.

JUHASZ—One pair?

PAULA—For myself.

JUHASZ—Eight pair ladies’ silk pajamas.

PAULA—[_Low, shyly._] If you think I——

JUHASZ—You need them. [_Ardently._] Of course you need them....
Perfume.... Exquisite heur.

PAULA—No, indeed!

JUHASZ—Yes. Three bottles.

PAULA—I hate the stuff.

JUHASZ—I adore it. It’s the most beautiful scent on earth. Four bottles!

PAULA—If you like it so much ... you may order a barrel. [_There is a
brief pause._]

JUHASZ—[_Jealously._] And ... what about the telegram?

PAULA—[_Rises slowly._] I wonder how it is ... that some people can have
such tender hearts and such very thick heads! [_He hesitates a moment,
then he takes her head in his hands and kisses her. PHILIP and the
ARISTOCRATIC LADY re-enter._]

PHILIP—Cash! Two hundred and forty. [_Shouts._] Cash! Two hundred and
forty. [_JUHASZ and PAULA separate hastily. JUHASZ slinks bashfully down
right._]

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_She is carrying a package._] How interesting! [_Goes
to the cashier’s desk._] My husband is going to Wiesbaden. I hear your
mother will be there too.

PAULA—My mother is at home, madame, and intends to stay there.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_To PHILIP._] But you told me——

PAULA—Idle gossip, madame. [_Points to the package._] Are you paying for
that now?

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—No. Charge it, please. As usual.

PAULA—[_Very curt and businesslike._] Yes, madame. But we must ask you
not to charge any more things here until your old account is settled.
[_The ARISTOCRATIC LADY gasps._] And about that old account. We must have
a check by the first of the month or we shall be compelled to place it in
our attorney’s hands.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—What’s that you say? [_JUHASZ makes a gesture of
protest._]

PAULA—In our attorney’s hands. From to-day on we are inaugurating a new
policy of extending credits for a limited period only.

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_Furious._] Mr. Juhasz, what do you say to this?

PAULA—[_Before JUHASZ can answer._] Mr. Juhasz has nothing to say to it.
He has given me entire charge of the credit department. [_JUHASZ hangs
his head._]

ARISTOCRATIC LADY—[_Indignantly._] Good day.

PAULA—Good day. [_The ARISTOCRATIC LADY sweeps indignantly out._]

PHILIP and JUHASZ—[_Simultaneously._] Good day.

PAULA—That settles her. And there are a few more like her I mean to
attend to. [_There is a pause._]

OSCAR—[_Comes through the archway, a letter in his hand._] Those
waterproof coats haven’t been ordered yet, Miss Paula. Shall I write and
order some? [_He puts the letter down on the desk before her._]

PAULA—Oscar ... I hope you understand that....

OSCAR—[_Grinning._] I understand. I can take my hat and go. [_Takes his
cap out of his pocket._]

PAULA—You guessed it.

OSCAR—Good-bye. Good-bye, everybody. [_Makes a deep tow to each in turn._]

JUHASZ—Take a dozen pair of socks before you go.

OSCAR—[_Jovially; taps his pocket._] I have.

JUHASZ—Take two dozen.

OSCAR—I took three. Good-bye, Miss Paula. [_He exits to the street._]

PAULA—[_Calls sharply._] Philip! [_PHILIP has been leaning resignedly
against the shelves at back. Now he straightens up with a start, silently
takes his hat and stick._] No. You aren’t dismissed. [_She takes
something out of her purse._] What opera are they singing to-night?

PHILIP—[_Resentfully._] Lohengrin.

PAULA—You go off at six to-night ... and take this with my compliments.

PHILIP—[_Looks at the ticket; joyfully._] Parquet ... eighth row.

PAULA—It was the best I could get.

JUHASZ—[_Beaming._] Philip, you’ll see the swan to-night. [_The THOROUGH
YOUNG LADY enters from the street._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—I knew I’d forget something.... I forgot to tell you
that I don’t want a period after each initial of the monograms on those
handkerchiefs.... Just the letters without the periods.

PAULA—[_Graciously._] Certainly, madame. We never have periods
embroidered unless they are specially ordered.

PHILIP—[_Who has gone behind his counter._] I’ll make a note of it,
madame, to be quite sure.

PAULA—Is there anything else you would like to-day? [_Comes around to the
table._] Are you interested in these girdles with antique silver buckles?
They are just in from Paris. [_She holds one up._]

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—May I see?

PAULA—There are only a few, as you see, and they are selling very fast.
So if you’d like one——

THOROUGH YOUNG LADY—I couldn’t possibly afford one this month.

JUHASZ—That doesn’t matter in the least, madame. Why, you can pay——

PAULA—[_Catches him up quickly, with unmistakable emphasis._] For
something cheaper, perhaps. Unfortunately we can’t charge these girdles
because we had to pay cash for them ourselves. They are not ordinary
merchandise, you see. They are made by a new atelier in Paris which——
[_As she speaks, and JUHASZ watches her, enchanted,_]

THE CURTAIN FALLS




THE SWAN

A COMEDY IN THREE ACTS

By FRANZ MOLNAR

English text by Benjamin Glazer




COSTUME NOTES


HYACINTH: A dark brown robe, like that of the Carmelites. Snow-white hair.

ALBERT: In the first and third acts the uniform of an Austrian general.
In the second act an Austrian general’s full dress uniform, with many
decorations, but without any insignia of rank.

WUNDERLICH: The uniform of a colonel of the Uhlans. Conspicuous shoulder
straps on his tunic.

CÆSAR: Full evening dress, black bow tie, white gloves. In the third act
a Redingot, with a big, white cravat.

LUETZEN: A light-colored sack suit in the first act. In the second act,
evening dress, with decorations.

ALFRED: Evening dress, black tie, white gloves.

HUSSARS: Short black boots; red trousers; dark blue tunics, richly
trimmed; white gloves.




PERSONS


    PRINCESS BEATRICE
    SYMPHOROSA, _her sister_
    HYACINTH, _her brother_
    ALEXANDRA, _her daughter_
    GEORG } _sons of Princess Beatrice_
    ARSEN }
    DR. HANS AGI
    PRINCE ALBERT
    PRINCESS MARIA DOMINICA
    COUNT LUETZEN
    COLONEL WUNDERLICH
    COUNTESS SIBENSTEYN
    CÆSAR
    ALFRED
    Chambermaid
    The Governor’s Wife
    A Lady
    Hussars, lackeys

_The action takes place in the castle of the Princess Beatrice._




ACT ONE




ACT ONE


    SCENE—_A pavilion in the garden which serves as a classroom
    for the young princes. At left an open door through which
    the garden can be seen, brilliant with sunlight. At right a
    glass door which leads into the other rooms. It is a summer
    afternoon. When the curtain rises DR. AGI is lecturing to GEORG
    and ARSEN at a table. The boys are listening attentively._

AGI— ... After a series of humiliations and protracted physical
sufferings he died on the island of St. Helena, on the fifth day of May,
1821, at the age of fifty-two. He was buried on a promontory of the
island on which, in his lifetime, he had loved to sit and contemplate
the sea. His faithful attendants wished to inscribe the word “NAPOLEON”
on his grave-stone.... But his tormentor, Hudson Lowe, persecuting him
even beyond the grave, forbade it. The contemptible Hudson Lowe permitted
them to inscribe only the words, “LE GENERAL BUONAPARTE.” Later the body
was conveyed to France in solemn state; and Paris honored the martyred
emperor with magnificent funeral services. There, to this day, in the
Dom des Invalides, raised high on a majestically simple bier of stone,
he lies at rest. [_He has concluded the lecture. The boys are silent,
impressed. AGI looks at his watch._] That finishes our lesson for to-day.
[_Closes the book._] Have your highnesses any questions to ask?

ARSEN—Last night we had a dispute with mother. She hates Napoleon. She
said he was a usurper.

AGI—That’s one point of view.

GEORG—How do you mean?

AGI—Your highnesses are free to form your own opinions. For my part, I
consider him a genius who made his power felt throughout the world.

GEORG—Is that your point of view?

AGI—Yes.

GEORG—Then it’s mine too.

ARSEN—That’s what I call an independent opinion.

GEORG—So it is.... Not mine, but the professor’s.

ARSEN—Mother was very angry.

AGI—With Napoleon.

GEORG—And with you.

AGI—What for?

GEORG—For not teaching us to hate Napoleon.

AGI—I present his story without bias of any sort.

ARSEN—We told mother that, but she thinks you ought to teach us to hate
him.

GEORG—She says Napoleon is largely to blame for the dethronement of our
family.

AGI—With all deference to her royal highness, that is a somewhat
exaggerated view of the historical facts. Napoleon himself never altered
in the political status of your illustrious family. If anyone can be
blamed for it, it was the King of Württemberg.

GEORG—But the King of Württemberg was one of Napoleon’s puppets.

AGI—Well, indirectly, there may be something in it. That is why I used
the term exaggerated. And yet, if anyone can profit by a study of the
courage, the initiative and the luck of Napoleon, certainly, in my
opinion, a dethroned sovereign family can. Doesn’t his career teach us
that thrones are not unattainable? He was only an obscure attorney’s son.
Now what he could attain, surely someone, who by right of birth——

ARSEN—Mother——

GEORG—Mother is sensitive on the subject of thrones just now, because
Prince Albert is staying with us.

ARSEN—Mother has always been sensitive about thrones.

GEORG—Prince Albert is heir-apparent to a real throne. And when mother
lays eyes on an heir-apparent, she loses her appetite.

ARSEN—Poor mother! No wonder. Her great-grandmother was a ruling
sovereign. Mother can’t be reconciled to the fact that that glory’s
forever ended.

GEORG—Forever?

AGI—Yes ... probably.... Nowadays it is very difficult to——

ARSEN—But suppose the Heir-Apparent marries Alexandra.

GEORG—He won’t marry her.

ARSEN—How do you know he won’t? If he does marry her, Alexandra will be
queen some day and we, as her family, will be attached to the Court. And
if I know my mother, it won’t be Albert who’ll do the ruling.

GEORG—_If_ he marries her!

ARSEN—He’ll marry her.

GEORG—Why should he?

ARSEN—Because mother wants him to. And because we all want him to,—Aunt
Symphorosa, Alexandra herself, I, you, the professor——

GEORG—I don’t want him to marry her. Do you, professor?

AGI—Indeed ... there is no station so exalted that her highness, the
Princess Alexandra would not grace it.

GEORG—Just the same, you don’t want her to marry him.

AGI—I? Why do you say that?

GEORG—Because you spoke so coldly and formally.

AGI—I ... I was surprised ... that’s all. It isn’t easy to grasp ... so
suddenly. You see, during the few months in which I have been attached
to your illustrious family—if I may put it so—her highness, your sister
... great lady though she is ... has been very kind to me ... to us all.
Among other things, it has been my privilege to instruct her in fencing
... and when I am suddenly called upon to think that my pupil is to wear
the ermine ... that she is to wear a crown ... and sit upon a throne....
Well ... that’s not an easy thing to——

GEORG—I’d be sorry to leave this place ... it’s so pleasant here. The
Hungarians have been so good to us. But, if we had to leave, you’d come
with us, wouldn’t you?

AGI—If I were wanted.

ARSEN—I shouldn’t mind going. Life at Court might be tiresome; but
politics, they say, are exciting. Keep you either trembling all the time
... or laughing. [_BEATRICE and ALEXANDRA enter from the garden. All
rise._]

BEATRICE—Finished your lesson, I see.

AGI—Yes, your highness. [_ALEXANDRA stands silent and motionless down
left._] We reached the death of Napoleon about ten minutes ago; and it
seemed to me such an appropriate stopping place I didn’t think it worth
while to start a new chapter to-day.

BEATRICE—[_Sharply._] An appropriate stopping place?

AGI—So I thought, your highness.

BEATRICE—A stopping place for the dead man, yes. But for us ... merely a
comma in an unfinished sentence.... Arsen! Georg! Prince Albert is coming
to visit you here. He has expressed the wish to talk with you about your
studies. I infer from what he said that he is particularly interested
in history. Count Luetzen, whom I consulted later, has confirmed that
inference. Now go wash your hands and faces, comb your hair, and change
your clothes.

ARSEN—When is he coming?

BEATRICE—As soon as he awakes.

GEORG—Is he asleep?

BEATRICE—I said, “As soon as he awakes.” Which should have conveyed to
you the information that he is now asleep.

GEORG—It did, mother. That’s why I asked you.

BEATRICE—That remark is superfluous. Arsen, I hear you have been coughing.

ARSEN—No, mother; only once or twice.

BEATRICE—Symphorosa tells me you have been coughing. [_To AGI._] Why
haven’t you reported it to me?

AGI—This morning his highness ate a green pepper and, despite my advice,
neglected to remove the fibers. That is why he coughed. I didn’t consider
it serious enough to report to you.

BEATRICE—You couldn’t possibly have known whether it was serious or not.
You’re not a doctor.

GEORG—[_To ARSEN._] That’s what he gets for Napoleon.

BEATRICE—What did you say?

GEORG—Nothing, mother; I only coughed.

BEATRICE—And you, I hear, were riding like a wild man this morning.

GEORG—Did Symphorosa tell you that too?

BEATRICE—Unmannerly boy! What I asked you was, why have you been riding
like a wild man?

GEORG—The horse was wild.

BEATRICE—[_To AGI._] Why didn’t you report to me that the horse was wild?

AGI—The horse was tame before his highness got in the saddle.

BEATRICE—You couldn’t possibly have known that. You are not the stable
master.

GEORG—Then he couldn’t have reported it either.

BEATRICE—You are not to speak unless you are spoken to. Arsen will have
his throat wrapped with wet towels to-night, and, beginning to-morrow,
you will ride no other horse than Pretty.

GEORG—Pretty? Oh, mother!

BEATRICE—Silence! [_They are suddenly silent._] I have a surprise for
you. You don’t deserve it.

ARSEN—What is it?

GEORG—What?

BEATRICE—Guess.

ARSEN—Alexandra is going to be a queen. [_Great embarrassment. Silence.
ALEXANDRA makes a startled movement._]

BEATRICE—Ill-mannered boy! How _can_ you say such a thing? I forbid you
even to think of such things. See here! I hope it isn’t you who puts such
ideas into the boys’ heads.

AGI—Heaven forbid, your highness!

BEATRICE—Where then did you get that idea?

GEORG—Why, I told it to him.

BEATRICE—And where did you get it?

GEORG—I thought of it myself.

BEATRICE—What?

GEORG—Don’t be angry because I can see things for myself, mother. I have
eyes in my head.

BEATRICE—If his highness, Prince Albert, weren’t coming here soon I’d
punish you severely. But don’t suppose that you’ll get off so easily.
[_To AGI._] And you might have reported to me that the boys occupy their
minds with such things.

GEORG—He couldn’t possibly have known. He’s not a member of the family.

BEATRICE—You Robespierre! Out of my sight! [_Utter silence._] Now I’ll
tell you the surprise. My brother Karl—that is—Father Hyacinth is here.

GEORG—Uncle Karl!

ARSEN—Oh, I’m so _glad_! [_Both are wild with joy; ARSEN embraces AGI._]

BEATRICE—Wild Indians!

ALEXANDRA—They’re very fond of him, mother. I am glad he has come, too.

ARSEN—Glad! Professor, Uncle Karl is the nicest man in the world.

GEORG—He used to be a prince, and now he is in Holy Orders. A monk. Wears
a cowl and a hood. And a scapulary.

BEATRICE—Those are mere externals. The essential thing is that he has a
heart of gold and a brain of steel.

GEORG—So he has.

ARSEN—He renounced the world to enter an educational order.

AGI—Yes, your highness, I heard about it.

GEORG—But you never met him.

AGI—I have never had the honor.

GEORG—Well, you’ll have the honor soon.... Mother, you couldn’t possibly
have brought us better news. Not even if you had come to tell us that
Alexandra——

ALEXANDRA—Georg!...

BEATRICE—I shan’t forget to have you punished.

HYACINTH—[_Calling from the garden._] Beatrice!

BEATRICE—Ssh! Wasn’t that someone calling?

HYACINTH—[_From the garden._] Beatrice!

BEATRICE—Just as I thought! It’s Hyacinth shrieking my name. His manners
are appalling.

ARSEN—Uncle Hyacinth!

GEORG—Hyacinth! Hyacinth! [_They are about to rush out to meet him._]

BEATRICE—Stay where you are. [_Sudden silence._] Indians! I’ll meet
him myself, else he’ll go on shouting until he awakens Prince Albert.
[_BEATRICE goes out into the garden._]

ALEXANDRA—[_To AGI._] My mother forgot to tell you that his highness, the
Prince, will later witness the fencing exercises.

AGI—As your highness commands.

ALEXANDRA—The necessary orders have been given at the gymnasium. First
there is to be sword practice between you and the boys, then they are to
have a bout with the foils.

AGI—May I ask whether your highness is to take part?

ALEXANDRA—No. [_There is a pause._]

GEORG—Why not?

ALEXANDRA—[_Coldly._] Because his highness particularly expresses his
interest in _your_ fencing. Are your costumes in proper condition?

AGI—Yes, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—How long will it take you and the boys to change?

AGI—Ten minutes will be plenty.

ALEXANDRA—I ask because the program has been rigidly fixed. When his
highness has finished in here, he is to inspect my little rose garden,
and from there he goes to the fencing exercises. The inspection of the
garden will take, I estimate, about fifteen minutes.

AGI—I deeply regret that your highness is not to show your skill in
fencing.

ALEXANDRA—I had expected to take part. But if I am to show him the garden
there won’t be time for me to change.

AGI—May I take the liberty to ask whether someone else mightn’t show his
highness the rose garden?

ALEXANDRA—Why do you ask that?

AGI—Then your highness could change your costume and take part in the
fencing instead.

ALEXANDRA—[_Coldly._] And why fencing instead?

AGI—I only ... thought ... your highness fences so well ... and
gracefully ... and——

ALEXANDRA—And?

AGI—And anyone can show him the garden.

ALEXANDRA—Thank you. I am quite aware of that.

AGI—I beg your pardon, your highness. It’s the pride of the teacher that
prompts me to speak.

ALEXANDRA—The program is not regulated to suit your pride. And, in any
case, I have no need of your advice on the subject. [_Raises her chin a
bit imperiously._]

AGI—As your highness commands. [_There is a brief pause._]

GEORG—May I say something?

ALEXANDRA—Well?

GEORG—The professor is right. [_He goes to the door as voices are heard
outside. HYACINTH and BEATRICE enter._]

ARSEN _and_ GEORG—[_Rushing to greet HYACINTH._] Uncle Hyacinth! Hyacinth!

ARSEN—Welcome!

GEORG—How long are you going to stay?

HYACINTH—Now, now, now, not so boisterously. [_Draws back playfully._]

BEATRICE—Indians!

GEORG—How long are you going to stay?

HYACINTH—I’ve scarcely arrived, and here you are asking me when I depart.

GEORG—Because we want you to stay a long time.

HYACINTH—It’s a long time since I’ve seen you. [_Embraces each in turn._]
Let me look at you. Splendid color! [_Feels their arms._] And muscle too,
eh?

GEORG—How long are you going to stay?

HYACINTH—Not long, I’m sorry to say. [_Approaches AGI, who bows low._]
And this is your tutor, Mr. Agi, of whom I have heard so much. [_Shakes
hands with him._] Beatrice writes me excellent reports about you. I hear
you are not only a good teacher but also an accomplished athlete. You row
and fence....

ARSEN—And ride.

HYACINTH—That’s splendid! And are you very fond of him, boys?

GEORG—[_Earnestly._] Oh, yes, Uncle Hyacinth.

HYACINTH—Good! And you? Are you satisfied with your pupils?

AGI—Entirely, your royal highness.

HYACINTH—No, professor, not highness. Only an humble servant of Christ.

AGI—I beg your pardon, Father.

HYACINTH—Oh, you mustn’t blush about it. Else I shall reproach myself
for having mentioned it. But then it’s so charming of a doctor of
philosophy to blush. I feel we’re good friends already. [_Shakes his
hand again._] I congratulate you on your method. Culture seasoned with
athletics—that’s the ideal curriculum.

BEATRICE—Hyacinth is such a confirmed pedagogue, the teacher interests
him more than the pupils.

HYACINTH—Quite so, my dear. Some day, when it’s raining hard and we have
nothing better to do, I’ll explain to you why, for the good of the child,
one should look first into the teacher’s head. Well, boys, what have you
learned to-day?

ARSEN—We finished Napoleon to-day. [_Glances at BEATRICE. There is an
awkward pause._]

HYACINTH—Mother doesn’t care much for Napoleon, eh?

BEATRICE—No.

GEORG—Last night we had a dispute about——

ALEXANDRA—Now, Georg, don’t begin that all over again.

HYACINTH—Why not? Tell me. What was the dispute about?

ARSEN—Mother thinks people should be taught to hate Napoleon.

GEORG—Especially our family.

HYACINTH—And what do you think?

AGI—I presented the story of Napoleon without bias of any sort.

HYACINTH—My dear fellow, then come with me and let me introduce you to
the Historical Congress at London as one of the world’s wonders. There is
no neutral ground where Napoleon is concerned. One either hates him or
loves him.

GEORG—He loves him, but he won’t admit it.

HYACINTH—Why won’t he admit it?

AGI—I have tried to let their highnesses form their own opinions about
him. Nevertheless, I _have_ pointed out to them Napoleon’s initiative,
his courage ... and his luck.

HYACINTH—Quite right. If anyone can profit by studying Napoleon’s career,
the young people of this family can.... My dear fellow, you’re blushing
again.

GEORG—Because a little while ago he said the same thing, almost word for
word.

HYACINTH—Ah, well, that doesn’t prove it. But if we are in error, my
friend, at least there are two of us.

BEATRICE—Time for you to get ready. [_To HYACINTH._] Prince Albert will
be here to visit them shortly.

HYACINTH—Then off with you. See you later, professor. [_AGI bows and
exits with the boys._]

BEATRICE—No matter what you say, I insist that the man was a usurper.

HYACINTH—What man?

ALEXANDRA—Mother never utters his name.

HYACINTH—Sorry. I had forgotten. [_SYMPHOROSA enters from the garden._]

SYMPHOROSA—He is asleep.

HYACINTH—Who?

BEATRICE—The prince. [_To SYMPHOROSA._] On which side is he lying?

SYMPHOROSA—Wait a moment. [_Reflects._] On his right side.

BEATRICE—Then he is not lying on his heart.

SYMPHOROSA—No.... On his liver.

BEATRICE—That’s good. Now go back to your post, Symphorosa, keep careful
watch and report everything to me.

SYMPHOROSA—Yes, dear. [_She exits into the garden._]

HYACINTH—Does my sister Symphorosa keep watch over the Prince’s slumbers?

BEATRICE—Yes. She is in constant touch with the adjutant who, on his
part, peeps through the keyhole.

HYACINTH—And that goes on all day long?

BEATRICE—I have to keep informed about everything. He is my guest. That
is no light responsibility.

HYACINTH—And how long has he been here?

BEATRICE—Four days.

HYACINTH—How much longer is he staying?

BEATRICE—According to program, he goes to-morrow. That’s why I wanted you
here sooner. He arrived unexpectedly, and here we were without a man.

HYACINTH—I started immediately I got your telegram. Albert has changed,
hasn’t he? He has become quite an attractive young man. [_He sits._]

BEATRICE—He is very agreeable.

HYACINTH—He appeared genuinely glad to see me. He almost wept when we met.

BEATRICE—He was very fond of my lamented husband too. And he was only a
child then.

HYACINTH—He embraced me cordially and kissed me at least four times. And
he fairly beamed when he told me how much he loved you all.

BEATRICE—That’s just it.

HYACINTH—What’s “just it”?

BEATRICE—[_To ALEXANDRA._] Will you go out into the garden a while, my
dear?

ALEXANDRA—Yes, mother. [_She exits into the garden._]

BEATRICE—[_Dries her eyes._]

HYACINTH—What’s wrong, my dear? Has anything happened?

BEATRICE—[_Her glances follow ALEXANDRA through the door out to the
garden._] I didn’t care to speak of it in her presence. But that’s just
it. Nothing has happened.

HYACINTH—I don’t understand.

BEATRICE—Albert told you how much he loved us all.

HYACINTH—Yes.

BEATRICE—Well, he has fallen in love with everyone here ... except
Alexandra.

HYACINTH—What did you expect in three days?

BEATRICE—Not love, perhaps ... but at least some sign of interest in the
girl. But no. Not the slightest advance. Though we did everything we
could.

HYACINTH—Perhaps ... there are ... political reasons....

BEATRICE—[_With a smile._] You underestimate me, Karl.

HYACINTH—Forgive me.... I know you are the best informed woman in Europe.

BEATRICE—I’ll show you my correspondence. Oh, I have no illusions on the
subject. I know perfectly well that the only reason they are considering
a marriage with us is because two or three royal families have made
simultaneous advances and they can’t afford to offend any of them.

HYACINTH—I see.

BEATRICE—And that is what makes me so anxious, Karl. The Czar wants him
for Olga—Constantine’s daughter. Edward would have liked to get him for
England—for Patricia. Frederic has been telegraphing me every day from
Vienna, and Amelie from St. Petersburg.

HYACINTH—So Albert must make up his mind quickly.

BEATRICE—Rome is out of the question for him. And so it is imperative for
him to choose a wife immediately.

HYACINTH—Then he’ll go to Montenegro.

BEATRICE—That is just what I am afraid of. He is a very obedient son.
Dominica, his mother, dominates him utterly. And she has sent him
everywhere. First to Dresden for Leopoldine Charlotte, but he didn’t
like her. She tends to corpulence. From there he went to Portugal. The
Infantin Silvina Gonzaga. A most admirable girl, but incredibly ugly. So
on he went to Belgium, to Maria Hermine, who is two heads taller than
he is—And he rightly decided that such an alliance would make him look
ridiculous in his people’s eyes. And now he is here. And if we let him
get away from us his next stop will undoubtedly be Montenegro. [_Dries
her eyes. SYMPHOROSA enters from the garden._]

BEATRICE—Well?

SYMPHOROSA—He stretched his hand outside the bed.

BEATRICE—What for?

SYMPHOROSA—For his lemonade.

BEATRICE—Was the lemonade there?

SYMPHOROSA—Yes, he drank it.

BEATRICE—I was so afraid it mightn’t have been there! And then?

SYMPHOROSA—Then he turned over and went to sleep again.

BEATRICE—Thank you, dear.

SYMPHOROSA—Not at all, dear. [_SYMPHOROSA hurries off._]

BEATRICE—[_Unhappily._] These past three days have been a great trial
to me, Karl. I am absolutely certain that he is here on account of
Alexandra. And yet he has treated the girl as if she didn’t exist. And
not a word, not a sign from his mother, Dominica. If he had serious
intentions, she’d be here by this time. [_Weeps._]

HYACINTH—Beatrice!

BEATRICE—I am not myself. Think of it, we have only one day more. This
afternoon, the ball to-night, and ... if nothing happens ... then our
chances are gone, perhaps forever.

HYACINTH—And not a sign?

BEATRICE—Not one. I needn’t tell you how I have watched for one.

HYACINTH—Perhaps Alexandra is——

BEATRICE—She is perfectly beautiful and clever and self-possessed ...
her poor father described her perfectly when he called her his swan. “My
proud, white swan!” ... And she is just like that,—majestic, silent,
earnest ... holds her head high ... conducts herself irreproachably. Yet
Albert is utterly indifferent to her. It’s disheartening!

HYACINTH—Beatrice, it is not like you to lose control of yourself like
this.

BEATRICE—[_Nervously._] I know, but I can’t help it. This is my last
great battle, not mine alone but our family’s. Now or never. Well, I
mean to win if I ruin myself in the attempt. [_SYMPHOROSA speaks in the
doorway._]

SYMPHOROSA—He is sleeping peacefully.

BEATRICE—Thank you, dear. [_SYMPHOROSA vanishes._]

HYACINTH—You mustn’t agitate yourself like this. What will be, will be.
And if it isn’t successful this time, it will be next time.

BEATRICE—When? Albert is thirty-five. And Alexandra isn’t getting younger.

HYACINTH—How old is she?

BEATRICE— ... and twenty.

HYACINTH—What ... and twenty?

BEATRICE—Nothing. Just “and twenty.”

HYACINTH—That is a new number.

BEATRICE—Yes, my dear. I invented it myself. A mother’s invention.

HYACINTH—I see. So she is just “and twenty.”

BEATRICE—But she can’t stay that way indefinitely. She is ripening.
In a political family that wouldn’t matter. But our daughters must be
beautiful. My conscience has troubled me for making the poor girl wait as
long as she has.

HYACINTH—One can’t blame you for that. You are a devoted mother, my dear.
But you are aware that our lives are ordered not for the individual’s
but for the family’s good. The happiest royal family may be composed of
unhappy individuals.

BEATRICE—Poor Xara.

HYACINTH—Who is that?

BEATRICE—Alexandra!

HYACINTH—Is that what you call her now?

BEATRICE—[_To SYMPHOROSA, who is entering._] Well?

SYMPHOROSA—The situation is unaltered. [_She exits._]

BEATRICE—Karl, I want you to help us.

HYACINTH—I? But, my angel, what can I do?

BEATRICE—You, with your charming personality——

HYACINTH—But, my dear child, it isn’t me you want him to marry.

BEATRICE—Oh, you—man! Don’t you understand that everything attractive in
the setting adds luster to the girl?

HYACINTH—What does Alexandra think of the matter?

BEATRICE—Just as I do.

HYACINTH—Has she said anything about it?

BEATRICE—No, but she is worried. [_SYMPHOROSA enters quickly, her hand
held agitatedly to her heart._] Well?

SYMPHOROSA—He is awake. [_BEATRICE makes a gesture of displeasure._]
Count Luetzen coughed outside his door.

BEATRICE—[_Quickly aghast._] Accidentally?

SYMPHOROSA—No, on purpose.

BEATRICE—Wasn’t the Colonel on guard?

SYMPHOROSA—Certainly. Count Luetzen came to the door expressly to cough.

BEATRICE—Why didn’t the Colonel cough himself?

SYMPHOROSA—Because his cough is too loud. Count Luetzen coughs
delicately. He always coughs his highness awake.

BEATRICE—What happened when he awoke?

SYMPHOROSA—He asked for eau de Cologne.

BEATRICE—Yes.

SYMPHOROSA—And a cup of weak tea.

BEATRICE—Yes.

SYMPHOROSA—Now don’t be alarmed, dear. He got everything he asked for.

BEATRICE—And when is he coming to see the boys?

SYMPHOROSA—I forgot to ask.

BEATRICE—[_Excitedly._] How could you? Hurry! Run! [_SYMPHOROSA goes out
swiftly._] She had to forget the most important thing of all! Heavens,
and I am sure the boys aren’t ready yet. [_Starts off at right._]

HYACINTH—[_Restraining her._] This won’t do, my dear. Calm yourself,
don’t be over-anxious. Everything will be all right. The boys must have
been ready long ago.... Really, dear ... this isn’t a bit like you. You
always had such poise, such assurance——

BEATRICE—In times of peace, yes. But this is war! I’ll go to meet him.
You call the boys. My God——

HYACINTH—Calm yourself!

BEATRICE—Now, Karl, you only make me more nervous, talking like that.
Can’t you see I’m in the fever of the last hope ... the finish of the
race?... Now I must summon my last reserves of strength.... To arms....
To arms.... To arms! [_SYMPHOROSA enters breathlessly._]

SYMPHOROSA—He’s coming!

BEATRICE—When?

SYMPHOROSA—Now.

BEATRICE—Immediately?

SYMPHOROSA—Immediately, immediately! He has started already. I ran on
ahead.

BEATRICE—Let’s go to meet him. [_Hurries into the garden. SYMPHOROSA
follows her._]

HYACINTH—[_Calls through the doorway at right._] Well, aren’t you ready
yet? [_The boys and AGI enter._]

GEORG—We’re ready. We’ve been waiting.

ARSEN—Is he coming?

HYACINTH—He’ll be here any minute. [_To AGI._] Tell me, my son, have you
altered your opinion about Napoleon since our discussion?

AGI—No.

HYACINTH—And suppose my sister requests you to teach Napoleon according
to her ideas.

AGI—Then I shall try to convince her highness——

HYACINTH—And if her highness still insists?

AGI—Then I shall regretfully take my leave.

HYACINTH—Shake hands. [_Shakes his hand._] Now I know you better than I
did a half hour ago.

GEORG—[_Who has been standing at the garden door, looking out._] They’re
coming!

HYACINTH—You stay here. I’ll go to meet them. [_Exits into the garden._]

AGI—[_At the table._] We will stand here ... around the table ... at the
places where we always sit. Prince Arsen there, Prince Georg there, I
here. And your highness, Georg, if you really meant what you said before
about being fond of me——

GEORG—Don’t worry. I’ll be good.

AGI—Just this once. If you behave well, I’ll take you up to the
observatory to-night.

ARSEN—[_Joyfully._] The observatory!

AGI—We’ll have a look at Capella and Vega, and I’ll explain the entire
summer firmament to you.

GEORG—I’ll be gentle as a lamb. [_There is a brief pause during which
voices are heard in the garden. PRINCE ALBERT appears first. He is young,
elegant, gracious. He wears a general’s uniform. He enters, chatting
with HYACINTH. After them come BEATRICE, SYMPHOROSA, ALEXANDRA, LUETZEN,
WUNDERLICH. All take positions before the chairs where they will later
sit._]

ALBERT—[_Very good-humoredly, continuing a speech begun outside._] ...
and, being a soldier, his cough is so incisive, so intrepid, so abrupt
that ... really, you know, it wakes one with a start. But Luetzen, on
the other hand, Luetzen is a diplomat. He can cough delicately, and
melodiously and suitably to every occasion. Luetzen can cough for you
in such a discreet, persuasive crescendo that you wake gradually and
without shock. Curious that personal peculiarities should extend even
to such things. Keen observation, what? Human. C’est humain. [_Looks
around._] Eh bien! Hello, you dear little boys. [_To AGI, who bows
profoundly._] Good morning! This would be the brilliant young professor.
What? [_A pause._] Why don’t you sit down? [_He sits. The others sit
simultaneously._]

BEATRICE—[_Ingratiatingly._] Did you rest well?

ALBERT—It is really astonishing how well I sleep here. I don’t know
whether it’s the fresh air, or that excellent bed, or the pleasant
surroundings that soothe and refresh me so. A perfect balm to my nerves
... really I am quite happy here. You may laugh, but it’s true that I
shall never forget the days I have spent with you here. Dear Beatrice ...
who thinks of everything for my comfort ... this fine old castle, this
gently rolling landscape, the peace, the harmony of the life you live
here.... Oh, I.... All I can say is that I have fallen in love with you.

BEATRICE—[_Sweetly._] We are very happy, Albert, to know that you are
enjoying your visit.

SYMPHOROSA—[_Sweetly._] We have no other aim, Albert.

ALBERT—At night, when I am alone, Beatrice, I think of my poor father and
your sainted husband ... Henry.... How often they strolled together in
this garden!

BEATRICE—Talking about their children.

ALBERT—They both were devoted fathers. They dedicated their lives to the
welfare of their children.

BEATRICE—They never tired of discussing their children, you know. Always
the children. The future of the children. What would become of them. How
to direct them in the right path. [_Turns, chair and all, toward ALBERT;
speaks with emphasis._] How some day the children would rear a family of
their own.

ALBERT—[_To HYACINTH._] Sometimes at night I lean out of my window and
fancy I see the two old men walking arm in arm along the path between
those banks of beautiful roses——

BEATRICE—[_Edging her chair nearer ALBERT._] They are Alexandra’s roses.
[_A pause._]

ALBERT—How? _Your_ roses?

ALEXANDRA—Mine, yes.

ALBERT—Did you plant them?

ALEXANDRA—Only some of them. But I tend them. [_A pause._]

ALBERT—And ... does that amuse you?

ALEXANDRA—Oh, yes. [_A pause._]

ALBERT—And ... don’t you ever prick yourself?

ALEXANDRA—Sometimes. [_A pause._]

ALBERT—Why don’t you wear gloves?

ALEXANDRA—I usually do.

ALBERT—And ... yet you prick yourself?

ALEXANDRA—Yes, through the gloves. [_A pause._]

ALBERT—You ought to wear thicker gloves.

ALEXANDRA—Yes, I must try thicker ones.

ALBERT—C’est ça! That’s life. One must be on one’s guard.

BEATRICE—That’s perfectly true! How good of you to be interested. Fancy!
Such practical advice too!

ALBERT—[_Modestly._] Oh, not at all ... only ... you see ... one picks up
a bit of experience here and there ... what? [_A pause, and then he rises
suddenly. They all stand up too._] Well now, let’s have a look at the
boys. Is this your classroom?

ARSEN—Yes.

ALBERT—You are sixteen, aren’t you?

ARSEN—Yes.

ALBERT—And you are seventeen?

GEORG—Yes.

ALBERT—Time flies. They are popping up fast, what?

BEATRICE—Indeed, yes, Albert.

ALBERT—You doubtless suppose that I shall examine you, like a school
inspector.

GEORG—No, we don’t.

ALBERT—Have no fear.... I am a proper uncle. I shall only question your
excellent young teacher.

BEATRICE—[_To SYMPHOROSA._] He is falling in love with him too.

HYACINTH—I commend him warmly to your notice. He is a man of culture and
an athlete; an astronomer and a swordsman.

ALBERT—[_Notices that they all are standing._] Why don’t you keep your
seats? [_HYACINTH, ALEXANDRA, BEATRICE and SYMPHOROSA sit; the others do
not_.] Good. I like that. It’s the modern spirit. What are you working on
now?

AGI—History, your highness.

ALBERT—Ah! That’s always interesting. What period?

AGI—The beginning of the Nineteenth Century.

ALBERT—Napoleon.

AGI—Yes, your highness. [_Embarrassment._]

ALBERT—You are interested in Pedagogy, aren’t you, Karl?

HYACINTH—Yes.

ALBERT—Did you know that Napoleon proposed to establish a school for
kings at Meudon?

HYACINTH—A very practical idea.

ALBERT—Yes, the pupils were to have been limited to boys in the line of
succession to a throne. The program of study was very interesting. No
details at all. General instruction along broad lines. No science, only
orientation; no theory, only practice. La Cases writes about it in his
memoirs.

HYACINTH—He was the only one who could have made it practical.

ALBERT—Yes, yes, he could have made many things practical. A capital
idea, too! A school from which you graduated with a monarch’s diploma in
hand. [_He laughs. The others respectfully echo his laugh. ALBERT looks
around him._] Well!... I’m glad to find you such fine healthy boys. Nice,
deep-set eyes this chap has, what?

BEATRICE—[_Rises._] Exactly like Alexandra’s. It is marvellous how alike
their eyes are. He resembles her in many ways.

ALBERT—[_Taking no notice of her remark._] You oughtn’t read too much, my
boy. That’s bad for the eyes. Sailors have the nicest eyes because they
are accustomed to look upon vast distances. At the sea and sky.

HYACINTH—He’d like that. He wants to be a sailor.

ALBERT—And you?

ARSEN—I? An explorer.

ALBERT—Where?

ARSEN—The Pole.

ALBERT—Which Pole, my son?

ARSEN—The South Pole.

ALBERT—You are mistaken if you suppose it’s any warmer there than at the
North Pole. [_He laughs._] And when do you start?

BEATRICE—[_Puts her arms about ARSEN._] He starts this very moment with
Georg to put on his fencing things. Uncle Albert wants to see how well
you fence.

ALBERT—Indeed, yes, I am very much interested. [_The boys bow._] See you
later. [_To AGI._] You too, what?

AGI—Yes, your highness, in the gymnasium.

ALBERT—Do you teach them fencing too?

AGI—Yes, your highness.

ALBERT—Splendid! You _are_ versatile, aren’t you? See you later. [_AGI
and the boys exit._]

ALBERT—[_Sits._] He has a very tactful and sympathetic manner, this
tutor. I am charmed with him.

HYACINTH—I liked him the moment I laid eyes on him.

ALBERT—And such a handsome young fellow.

BEATRICE—[_To SYMPHOROSA._] I told you he’d fall in love with him.

SYMPHOROSA—Don’t be upset about it, I beg of you.

ALBERT—Hah! [_Rises suddenly._] And while we are waiting for the great
fencing competition....

BEATRICE—We can show you a number of things worth seeing. Now if you
are interested in beautiful roses, there is Alexandra’s own little
rose-garden—— [_ALEXANDRA rises._]

ALBERT—Oh, yes.

BEATRICE—[_Sweetly._] The roses are her pride and joy ... and there are
some rare specimens among them.

ALBERT—[_Without enthusiasm._] Splendid! [_His eyes seek out WUNDERLICH._]

WUNDERLICH—[_Comes forward._] Your highness may be interested in ... the
new dairy I saw here yesterday. An absolutely modern innovation. They
milk the cows by vacuum.

ALBERT—By vacuum?

WUNDERLICH—Yes, your highness.

ALBERT—Like sucking up dust from a carpet?

WUNDERLICH—Exactly. It is most interesting.

ALBERT—But that sounds quite fantastic. One really must look at it. I
have never seen anything like that before. [_ALEXANDRA sits down._] And
did you have it installed yourself, Aunt Beatrice?

BEATRICE—I installed it as an experiment.

ALBERT—You are really a remarkable woman.

BEATRICE—If I may say so, Albert, the dairy is quite far from here.

ALBERT—All the better. We need a little exercise.

BEATRICE—As you please. We’ll go to the dairy then.

ALBERT—Oh, no.... I shouldn’t think of troubling _you_ to come with me.
I’ll go with Luetzen and the Colonel. We’ll make it a brisk walk.

HYACINTH—If you permit, I’ll join you.

ALBERT—No, I can’t have that. My sightseeing needn’t inconvenience any of
you.

HYACINTH—But——

ALBERT—No, no—— [_Starts to go._] You mustn’t feel obliged to run about
with me as though I were a stranger. Forward, march, Luetzen. Coming,
Colonel. When they are ready at the gymnasium send someone after us. [_He
is in the doorway at left._]

BEATRICE—I’ll telephone.

ALBERT—But we shall probably be among the cows.

BEATRICE—Yes, I know.

ALBERT—Is there a telephone there?

BEATRICE—In every stall.

ALBERT—You really are a wonderful woman. Incredible! [_There is a pause;
then he says suddenly_] Adieu! [_Exits quickly into the garden with
LUETZEN and WUNDERLICH. There it another painful and dejected silence.
BEATRICE sits down, despairingly. ALEXANDRA, greatly offended, exits at
right._]

HYACINTH—Well, he disposed of the rose-garden very neatly.

BEATRICE—[_Rises._] What did I tell you? Could anything have been more
pointed? You heard that Colonel. I scarcely got the rose-garden out of my
mouth when he came forward with the cows.

HYACINTH—A coincidence.

BEATRICE—[_Heatedly._] Was it? Well, I shan’t be beaten by such a
coincidence.

HYACINTH—I observed that your first attempts in that direction were
without conspicuous success.

BEATRICE—I shan’t give up as long as there is a ray of hope, an hour of
time left.

SYMPHOROSA—What are you going to do now?

BEATRICE—There is only one way left.

SYMPHOROSA—What way?

BEATRICE—Only one. A terrible way.

SYMPHOROSA—You alarm me, Beatrice.

BEATRICE—Yes, you may well be alarmed. For what I propose to do is so
reprehensible that, if anyone else did it, I’d despise her all my life.

HYACINTH—What in Heaven’s name are you thinking of?

BEATRICE—God will forgive a mother anything she does for her child. And a
widow what she does for the welfare of her family. [_She faces HYACINTH
with tears in her eyes._] You will forgive me.

HYACINTH—I have forgiven you already, but tell me what you mean to do.

SYMPHOROSA—I know you, Beatrice. When you start talking in that strain
there is only one bit of advice I can give you. Don’t do it.

BEATRICE—You will be good enough to hold your tongue. The whole
difficulty lies in the fact that Albert’s interest in the girl had not
been aroused. His interest—as a man.

SYMPHOROSA—Merciful heaven!

BEATRICE—Why? Does it begin so shockingly?

HYACINTH—Rather disquietingly.

BEATRICE—Well, be prepared for worse. There are certain grounds beyond
which Alexandra may not go. Alexandra can’t flirt with him, for instance.

SYMPHOROSA—I am beginning to be reassured.

BEATRICE—Alexandra can’t ... throw herself at him.

SYMPHOROSA—Thank God for that.

BEATRICE—She wouldn’t be capable of such a thing, and if she were, my
pride wouldn’t permit it.

HYACINTH—Well, then?

BEATRICE—A man’s interest in a woman ... can best be aroused ... through
the attentions of another man.

SYMPHOROSA—How shocking!

HYACINTH—Not yet. But it begins most curiously. Go on.

BEATRICE—Once Albert is made to see the woman in Alexandra, the rest will
be easy for us. We have no time to lose. He goes to-morrow.... And he
seems to have taken a fancy to the tutor.

HYACINTH—Ah!

SYMPHOROSA—Beatrice!

BEATRICE—[_Greatly excited._] Be still! Do you think I am in the mood to
consider your petty prejudices now?

HYACINTH—And what is it you propose to do with the professor?

BEATRICE—Invite him to the ball to-night.

SYMPHOROSA—The world will come to an end.

BEATRICE—And Alexandra will show him marked attention.

SYMPHOROSA—That ... that ... is worthy of Machiavelli’s brain.

BEATRICE—It would never have occurred to me if Albert hadn’t praised the
professor. It was he who put the plan in my head. And it can’t fail. A
rival of his own rank might leave him quite indifferent ... but a mere
tutor ... that is irresistible.

SYMPHOROSA—I shan’t live through it.

BEATRICE—I command you to live through it. Alexandra will be attentive
to the tutor ... and ... and Alexandra will dance a quadrille with the
tutor. And God will forgive me, and God will forgive Alexandra. And I
shall never forgive the tutor.

HYACINTH—For what?

BEATRICE—For putting me under obligation to him.

SYMPHOROSA—[_Indignantly._] Alexandra mayn’t flirt with the Crown Prince,
but she may flirt with a tutor.

BEATRICE—[_Dryly._] That is quite different. It’s like flirting with your
horse.

SYMPHOROSA—Karl, how can you listen to such dreadful proposals and be
silent?

HYACINTH—They are not dreadful proposals. They are mere feminine
maneuvers which are not as considerable as you suppose. There is
something else I am considering.

BEATRICE—What?

HYACINTH—The poor tutor.

BEATRICE—What has the tutor got to do with it? No one’s harming him.

HYACINTH—Tell me, my dear, has Alexandra ever taken particular notice of
the tutor before?

BEATRICE—How can you ask such a thing?

HYACINTH—That means she hasn’t. And what do you suppose will happen, my
dear, if she suddenly takes notice of him now——

BEATRICE—Oh, you needn’t be afraid it will inspire the fellow with any
false hopes. I’ll see to that.

HYACINTH—I’m not so sure. The tutor is young and temperamental. I
admit I have no eye for such things any more, but just now, when I saw
them together, it seemed to me that the young man looked at Alexandra
respectfully, yet adoringly. As a cat might look at a canary in its cage,
respecting it, yet ... longing to devour it.

BEATRICE—You are not trying to suggest that he is in love with her?

HYACINTH—No. But certainly his interest is aroused.

BEATRICE—What of it?

HYACINTH—Only that it seems unjust to play with the young fellow in that
fashion, and then cast him aside.

BEATRICE—Am I to understand that your sympathies are on the side of the
tutor?

HYACINTH—My sympathies are on the side of the humanities.

BEATRICE—The possible disappointment of a mere tutor concerns you more
than the happiness of your sister and your niece, and the historical
destiny of your family.

HYACINTH—My dear sister, you have looked upon this robe of mine so often
that you have ceased to notice it. It is true, I am more concerned with
rectitude and fair dealing than with all your schemes about Albert’s
throne and Alexandra’s crown.... I regard my fellow man not as a tool,
but as a creature of God. In my younger days, when I maintained a racing
stable, I sometimes found it necessary to enter one horse merely to lead
and set the pace for another horse, and at the finish to lag behind and
let him win the race. But that was a horse, my dear sister. And whoever
seeks to use a man in that fashion; whoever holds the tranquillity of
a human soul so cheaply—she, my dear sister, she has great need of the
excuse that maternal love impels her. That is my opinion, dear; and now
I, too, am going to look at that vacuum. [_He exits quickly into the
garden._]

BEATRICE—[_With determination._] Nothing shall hinder me! Stop crying!
I command you to put that handkerchief away. I am desperate now. You
needn’t pay any attention to him. He always had opinions, but never
manners. If it had been left to the men of our family we’d have been
dethroned as early as the eighteenth century. Go, and send Alexandra
in to me. [_SYMPHOROSA exits at right. There is a brief pause before
ALEXANDRA enters._]

ALEXANDRA—You sent for me, mother?

BEATRICE—Yes, my child. You are dearest to me in all the world. My blood
flows in your veins. You will understand me.

ALEXANDRA—Yes, mother.

BEATRICE—Your will is as strong as my own.

ALEXANDRA—Oh, yes, mother.

BEATRICE—And if it falters you must lean on my will for support, and make
yourself as steadfast and determined as I am.

ALEXANDRA—Yes, mother.

BEATRICE—You know what I am referring to, and what it is I want. Do you
want it as much as I do?

ALEXANDRA—[_Calmly, earnestly._] Yes, mother.

BEATRICE—Wounded vanity heals quickly. After all, roses _are_ more
beautiful than cows.

ALEXANDRA—Oh, mother——

BEATRICE—And there is no weapon more powerful than will. You understand
me, my child?

ALEXANDRA—I understand, but I don’t know what you want me to do.

BEATRICE—We mean to ask the professor to the ball to-night. You will
invite him.

ALEXANDRA—[_Astonished._] I, mother?

BEATRICE—Yes, you.

ALEXANDRA—The professor?

BEATRICE—Yes. [_There are tears in her eyes._] I know it is a dreadful
thing to ask of you, my child ... but desperate necessity compels me to.
Don’t hate your mother for it, my poor, dear child ... love me, for I
love you so....

ALEXANDRA—[_Calm and self-contained._] Mother!

BEATRICE—[_Dries her eyes._] Must I explain any further? You understand,
don’t you?

ALEXANDRA—I understand you, mother.

BEATRICE—I wanted to send to Vienna for a Duke, but there wasn’t time.
And that wouldn’t have served as well, anyway——

ALEXANDRA—[_Coolly._] As you wish. I shall invite the professor to the
ball to-night.

BEATRICE—But not with that expression.

ALEXANDRA—I know, mother. With another expression.

BEATRICE—And you will promise him that [_bursts into tears_]—that he may
dance a quadrille with you. [_ALEXANDRA is silent._] Well? Why don’t you
speak?

ALEXANDRA—This comes very suddenly, mother.

BEATRICE—But our time is so short! Oh, if we only had more time! Well!
Speak!

ALEXANDRA—Don’t misunderstand me, mother. I only want a moment to get
used to the thought. The professor is a plain farmer’s son.

BEATRICE—Alas!

ALEXANDRA—And when I think that my arm will rest in his.

BEATRICE—You will wear long gloves, my child.

ALEXANDRA—It isn’t touching him that matters, mother ... but the thought
of it.

BEATRICE—He is one of God’s creatures, just as we are.

ALEXANDRA—I’ll try to remember that, mother.

BEATRICE—Do you ask the flowers and the beasts of the field who their
ancestors were?

ALEXANDRA—No, mother.

BEATRICE—[_Reassuringly._] Of course not! You are friendly with horses
and squirrels and all sorts of common animals, aren’t you?

ALEXANDRA—Yes, mother, from that point of view it is a bit easier.

BEATRICE—There, you see, my dear.

ALEXANDRA—But ... there is something else to consider.

BEATRICE—Speak freely. I will guide you.

ALEXANDRA—He is a human being, isn’t he?

BEATRICE—[_Without conviction._] Oh, certainly, certainly.

ALEXANDRA—He is likely to _think_ about it. And that is the great
difference between him and a squirrel.

BEATRICE—That is his affair.

ALEXANDRA—But it is possible that he may misunderstand me.

BEATRICE—You will do nothing that he can possibly misunderstand. My mind
is easy on that score.

ALEXANDRA—Of course not, mother. And yet he can’t help but notice my
sudden change of manner toward him.

BEATRICE—That need give us no concern.

ALEXANDRA—But I must know what I am to do if ... of course ... I only
mentioned it because one ought to think of everything ... if he should
feel attracted to me.

BEATRICE—[_In alarm._] You haven’t noticed anything of the kind?

ALEXANDRA—That must be thought of too.

BEATRICE—Have you ever noticed anything of the kind in him?

ALEXANDRA—[_Coldly._] I never notice what I don’t want to notice.

BEATRICE—That means you have?

ALEXANDRA—I can’t say that, but ... he is not at ease when he speaks to
me. He is not at ease.

BEATRICE—That signifies nothing, my child. Don’t let it concern you. It’s
nothing to be ashamed of. It happens so often. Underlings of all sorts
may be infatuated with a lady of high rank ... officers, even physicians——

ALEXANDRA—But one mustn’t—notice such things.

BEATRICE—Heaven forbid! But then the underling never dares to speak of
his infatuation. Generally he works out his own salvation. Often in a
most noble manner.

ALEXANDRA—But then——

BEATRICE—Don’t trouble yourself about anyone else. Leave that to us. You
need only keep your eyes on the future, looking neither to the left nor
to the right, but always ahead of you.

ALEXANDRA—Yes, mother. [_ALFRED enters at right._]

ALFRED—The professor reports to your highness that their young highnesses
have put on their fencing costumes and are awaiting your highness’ orders.

BEATRICE—The boys are to go to the gymnasium and wait there. The
professor is to come in here. [_ALFRED exits at right. With tears in her
eyes, BEATRICE turns to ALEXANDRA._] Be strong, my poor, dear child.
[_Kisses her, presses her hands warmly._] Be strong—— [_She exits quickly
into the garden. For a moment ALEXANDRA is alone, then AGI enters, in
fencing costume. In his left hand he holds a fencing mask, in his right a
sword. He stands stiff and formal at the door, awaiting orders. There is
a pause._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Stands down left; speaks without looking at him._] To-night,
... I understand there will be a rare astronomical spectacle.

AGI—Yes, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—What sort?

AGI—Vega and Capella may be seen to best advantage to-night.

ALEXANDRA—What is ... Vega?

AGI—The chief star of Lyra. A green star which is a thousand times
brighter than the sun.

ALEXANDRA—And the other?

AGI—Capella. A golden star, very beautiful.

ALEXANDRA—You intended to show them to the boys to-night.

AGI—Yes, your highness, in the tower.

ALEXANDRA—You love the stars.

AGI—Very much, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—And you know all about them?

AGI—I know very little about them, your highness. But even that little is
marvellously beautiful.

ALEXANDRA—There will be no star-gazing to-night.

AGI—As your highness commands.

ALEXANDRA—We are having a farewell reception to-night in honor of the
Crown Prince. He goes away to-morrow.

AGI—Too bad.

ALEXANDRA—The official personages of the neighborhood have been asked
to come. There won’t be many. I have expressed the desire that ... you
be invited too. [_AGI, wide-eyed with astonishment, comes a pace or two
nearer._] That is why I said you couldn’t look at the stars to-night.

AGI—[_Modestly._] I am very happy, your highness; and if anything could
make me happier, it is the privilege of receiving the invitation from
your highness’ own lips.

ALEXANDRA—The reception is likely to be stiff and formal. I hope you
won’t be bored.

AGI—I couldn’t be bored where your highness was.

ALEXANDRA—In case you do find the society of officials and councillors
tiresome, you may come to me.

AGI—[_Astonished._] If your highness will allow me——

ALEXANDRA—Then, for once, perhaps you may speak to me about something
else than fencing tricks. That’s all you have ever spoken to me about.

AGI—It wasn’t for me to choose, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—You will talk to me about the stars ... about the green star
and the golden star.

AGI—I shall esteem it a privilege, your highness. [_There is a pause._]

ALEXANDRA—Curious. I am a bit afraid of you now.

AGI—Why, your highness?

ALEXANDRA—You look so martial in that costume and with that sword in your
hand.

AGI—Your highness has often seen me like this ... in the gymnasium.

ALEXANDRA—That was different. There I had a sword in my hand too. But
here I feel so defenseless.

AGI—Do I look so terrifying?

ALEXANDRA—I shouldn’t say—terrifying.

AGI—What then?

ALEXANDRA—Rather aggressive.

AGI—[_Astonished._] It is curious, your highness ... but I have the
unaccountable feeling that I am wholly on the defensive ... now....

ALEXANDRA—Well, then, you’ll come, won’t you.

AGI—Yes, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—And won’t you regret the green star?

AGI—No, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—At nine, then.

AGI—Thank you ... your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Not at all ... Professor. [_She nods curtly and exits at left
into the garden. AGI’S puzzled, thoughtful glance follows her until she
has vanished. Then he stands a moment, head high, eyes blazing, before_

THE CURTAIN FALLS




ACT TWO




ACT TWO


    THE BALL.—_A magnificent, brilliantly illuminated room. Big
    double doors at left and right. High arches in the back wall
    give out into a corridor, and beyond each arch is a tall glass
    door, curtained with some transparent material._

    _Down right a table is laid for seven. Two tabourettes stand
    between the table and the audience. Soft music can be heard off
    stage. It is midnight._

    _When the curtain rises CÆSAR is pouring wine into the glasses
    and putting the finishing touches to the table arrangements.
    Finished, he goes to the door at right and stands, immobile as
    a statue._

    _The glass door back left opens; SYMPHOROSA enters. For a
    moment the music sounds louder, a glimpse of people dancing can
    be seen; then the door is closed._

    _SYMPHOROSA stops, looks back as if she is expecting someone to
    follow her. After a brief pause the door is opened again and
    BEATRICE enters._

BEATRICE—Did you beckon me to come out?

SYMPHOROSA—Yes.

BEATRICE—What do you want? Why do you act so mysteriously?

SYMPHOROSA—I didn’t want to whisper to you in there.

BEATRICE—Don’t be excited! What’s the matter? Tell me calmly.

SYMPHOROSA—Beatrice, I think that Alexandra has been sitting in that
corner with the professor altogether too long.

BEATRICE—For the first time in my life, Symphorosa, I think you are right.

SYMPHOROSA—It seems to me she is going just a bit further than is
strictly necessary.

BEATRICE—Apparently I have made a mistake in the size of the dose. But
don’t worry, my dear.

SYMPHOROSA—She should be told that she has done enough for the present.
Let her keep away from the professor a while.

BEATRICE—Very well, Symphorosa, go and tell her to keep away from the
professor. Only how will you tell her?

SYMPHOROSA—I’ll signal to her. Like this. [_She indicates how._]

BEATRICE—That’s right, my dear. [_Embraces her affectionately._] You are
a darling!

SYMPHOROSA—And you are the cleverest woman in the world.

BEATRICE—Only the cleverest in this room. [_SYMPHOROSA makes a gesture of
protest._] For in the next room is a cleverer woman than I: my daughter.
[_SYMPHOROSA sighs._] Don’t sigh. You’d do better to admire her poise
and tact. And the effect it has had. Albert remarked to me twice that
to-night for the first time he has begun to notice how beautiful she is.
He won’t go away to-morrow. Wait and see. And the day after to-morrow
his mother, Maria Dominica, will be here. [_Noticing SYMPHOROSA’S
impatience._] You are impatient, my dear. Well, go and signal to her.
[_SYMPHOROSA hurries off into the ballroom. BEATRICE watches her exit
with a contented smile, then looks around the room, sees CÆSAR._] Cæsar!

CÆSAR—Your highness.

BEATRICE—Is everything ready?

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness.

BEATRICE—The table?

CÆSAR—Seven covers. For his royal highness, the family, the adjutant and
the professor.

BEATRICE—You will be sure that the service is flawless.

CÆSAR—Your highness!

BEATRICE—What is the menu?

CÆSAR—Everything his royal highness likes. His excellency, Count
Luetzen, was good enough to indicate to me the dishes his royal highness
prefers for supper.

BEATRICE—What are they?

CÆSAR—Cold bouillon.

BEATRICE—Yes.

CÆSAR—Cold salmon.

BEATRICE—Yes.

CÆSAR—Cold beef.

BEATRICE—Yes.

CÆSAR—With his own mustard.

BEATRICE—His own mustard?

CÆSAR—With his royal highness’ own mustard.

BEATRICE—And what may that be?

CÆSAR—His royal highness carries his own mustard wherever he goes.

BEATRICE—That is a new custom!

CÆSAR—The chef says it is a very ancient custom. Eminent Greeks of olden
times always brought their own spices to the table of their host.

BEATRICE—Is the chef such a learned man?

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness. He also told me that the Greek gourmands used
to wear a protective shell over their tongues, which they only removed at
meal-times.

BEATRICE—[_Gives him a look of stern reproof._] I didn’t ask you that.

CÆSAR—No, your highness. I took the liberty of mentioning it as a
curiosity....

BEATRICE—You will only answer my questions.

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness. And cold chicken.

BEATRICE—What’s that?

CÆSAR—Cold chicken—after the beef.

BEATRICE—What time will supper be served?

CÆSAR—In twenty-four minutes, your highness. And an ice.

BEATRICE—The menu is too cold for me. In my cup you will serve hot tea,
without sugar.

CÆSAR—I am afraid, your highness, that hot tea may be distinguishable
from the cold bouillon ... by the vapor.

BEATRICE—You will see to it that the hot tea has no vapor.

CÆSAR—I don’t know just how that can be done, your highness, but it will
be.

BEATRICE—I shall expect it to be. [_CÆSAR steps back as SYMPHOROSA
re-enters._] Well?

SYMPHOROSA—I signaled to her.

BEATRICE—Yes.

SYMPHOROSA—And she stood up immediately.

BEATRICE—Good. Now go and see that Arsen puts those cold towels around
his neck.

SYMPHOROSA—What a perfect mother you are!

BEATRICE—There is no other joy on earth. [_SYMPHOROSA exits at left. She
addresses CÆSAR._] Where is supper to be served from?

CÆSAR—From here, your highness. [_He claps his hands twice. A procession
of servants enters, slowly, single-file. ALFRED, platter in hand, comes
first. After him come two lackeys, each carrying a platter, borne
ceremonially aloft. In the rear are two Hussars with champagne buckets.
ALFRED and the two lackeys go to the table and, their backs to the
audience, lay the three platters on the table. Simultaneously the two
Hussars deposit their buckets on the floor near the wall at right. Then
the Hussars take their station to the left of the right hand arch while
the two lackeys stand in profile between the arch and the doorway at
right. ALFRED stands between them, bowing._]

CÆSAR—Voilà!

BEATRICE—Bravo, Cæsar! [_She hurries off into the ballroom. CÆSAR bows
profoundly._]

CÆSAR—[_When the door has closed behind BEATRICE._] Hussars! [_The
Hussars come forward. He inspects them from head to foot._] Right about,
face! [_They obey the order. He adjusts their tunics._] Left face! [_They
obey._] Very good. [_The Hussars step back._] Alfred! [_ALFRED comes
forward slowly, and with dignity._] Son Altesse Royale Madame la Duchesse
prendra au lieu du consommé froid du thé chaud. Mais du thé chaud _non
fumant_. Le thé doit faire comme couleur absolument l’impression d’un
consommé froid.

ALFRED—Javoll! Sie können sich bestimmt auf mich verlassen. Alles wird in
Ordnung sein.

CÆSAR—Vabene mio caro, vabene, vabene, grazia, grazia. [_ALFRED exits,
followed by the two lackeys. The Hussars occupy themselves with the
wine buckets and bottles. CÆSAR supervises their activities and gives
them whispered orders. Meantime ALEXANDRA has entered back left. Behind
her, almost beside her, comes AGI. His demeanor is a curious mixture of
deferential formality and blissful intimacy._]

ALEXANDRA—Cæsar!

CÆSAR—Your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Is supper to be served in here?

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness. The guests will be served at small tables
in the yellow salon. His royal highness and the family in here. Her
highness, your mother, was here just a moment ago.

ALEXANDRA—Oh, then everything has been looked after. How soon will supper
be served?

CÆSAR—In seventeen minutes. Has your highness any orders?

ALEXANDRA—Nothing, thank you. [_CÆSAR returns to the wine buckets. At his
signal the Hussars exit. During the following scene CÆSAR is very busy
between the serving table and the supper table. But he is listening._]

AGI—May I escort you back to the ballroom?

ALEXANDRA—Please don’t.... I am afraid you misunderstood me. When I said
I was going in to look at the table ... I ... I didn’t mean for you to
come with me.

AGI—Your highness, I beg your pardon. [_Is about to withdraw._]

ALEXANDRA—Wait ... don’t go. [_Embarrassed._] Perhaps I put it a bit too
strongly. I didn’t mean it that way.

AGI—Please, your highness. [_CÆSAR discreetly exits back right._]

ALEXANDRA—Forgive me. I am unpracticed in such things. I didn’t mean to
be rude.

AGI—I know, your highness. The reason I misunderstood was because while
I was in the midst of my description of the constellation of the Eagle,
your highness suddenly stood up ... and so I thought I ought to stand up
too, and finish the sentence on the way. I was saying that these seven
stars represent a flying eagle and that the eagle’s head——

ALEXANDRA—That’s where I stood up.

AGI—Yes. And it never occurred to me that you were making your escape.

ALEXANDRA—Your stars _were_ beginning to get tiresome.

AGI—I am sorry, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—I had expected to hear about the mysteries and the miracles
of the sky, and you spoke only of names and numbers. I never knew the
subject was so tedious.

AGI—The stars have their emotional side, too. But I didn’t dare to speak
of it.

ALEXANDRA—Perhaps ... that might have been more exciting.

AGI—I could have told you how across those vast distances and beyond the
millions of stars one’s thoughts go on to God and His eternity ... to
life and death ... to life—[_softly_] and love.

ALEXANDRA—[_Coldly._] Can your imagination bridge such vast distances as
that?

AGI—When I look up to you, your highness,—yes. [_There is a pause._]

ALEXANDRA—[_More coldly._] And eternity, too?

AGI—When I look down upon myself, your highness. [_Another pause._]

ALEXANDRA—And you believe in such miracles?

AGI—If I didn’t believe in miracles, your highness, how could I endure my
life?

ALEXANDRA—Is it so unendurable?

AGI—It would be, if——

ALEXANDRA—If?

AGI—If I hadn’t two—an outer and an inner life.

ALEXANDRA—Have you? I never noticed.

AGI—Because your highness believes in miracles, too.... You believe
my cold and impassive face ... cold and impassive ... even when it is
slapped.

ALEXANDRA—[_In surprise._] Is your face slapped?

AGI—Every day.

ALEXANDRA—Who slaps your face? [_He does not answer._] Who? Do we? Do I?
[_He nods his head._] Without knowing it?

AGI—They are the worst slaps of all.

ALEXANDRA—I must say ... this is more mysterious than the stars. Do I
hurt you?

AGI—Every day your highness looks upon a miracle. A man’s face, his
voice, all his outward appearance remain calm and unruffled ... while
inwardly he burns. And you never ask for the explanation of the miracle.

ALEXANDRA—The explanation?

AGI—[_With rising passion._] Why does your highness suppose I endure it
all? Why do I go on teaching, humbly, silently and submissively? Why do
I stifle my individuality? Why am I here at all? [_ALBERT enters at left
with two ladies._]

ALEXANDRA—I never thought——

ALBERT—[_Good-humoredly interrupts._] An ideal daughter of the house!
Before the concert she looks after the musicians, and before supper she
looks after the table. Her watchful eye is everywhere.

FIRST LADY—Your highness ought to see her at the hospital among the poor
sick people.

ALEXANDRA—You mustn’t flatter me, Countess. The praise is due to you and
the other ladies. I am there because it is my duty to be.

SECOND LADY—Oh, your highness!

ALBERT—Delightfully modest, isn’t she? I know. You have the same noble
character as your dear mother. Good evening, Professor. [_AGI bows
profoundly. ALBERT addresses the two ladies._] A brilliant fellow, this
young man. [_Starts up right with the two ladies._] He is not only a
scientifically trained astronomer and teacher but also a swordsman of the
first rank. I saw him fencing with the boys this afternoon; and I must
say: C’était parfait, absolutement parfait! [_Exits with the ladies as he
speaks._]

ALEXANDRA—Now you are more melancholy than ever.... Why?

AGI—Shall I say it, your highness?

ALEXANDRA—Is it anything I shouldn’t hear?

AGI—[_Looking toward the door through which ALBERT has vanished._] I am
jealous, your highness. [_There is a pause._]

ALEXANDRA—I am grieved, Professor. Suddenly you have made me remember ...
those vast distances you spoke of before.

AGI—To-night ... to-night they hadn’t seemed so vast.

ALEXANDRA—Yes ... to-night....

AGI—To-night, for the first time, you looked at me as if I were a human
being ... a man.... Looked at me ... and said friendly ... intimate
things to me——

ALEXANDRA—I said nothing that——

AGI—[_With growing boldness._] What you said ... and did ... and looked
... bewildered me, upset my balance, broke down my self-control ... else
I should never have spoken. There is a sort of poetry in hopelessness.
Until to-night, at least I had that. It was beautiful in its way. But now
it’s gone, too. A pity!

ALEXANDRA—I don’t know what to say.... I wish I could give it back to you.

AGI—That’s beyond your power, little princess.

ALEXANDRA—Don’t call me that, if you please.

AGI—You see, I can’t speak to you the way I used to. I am confused, your
highness. But to-morrow ... to-morrow....

ALEXANDRA—No, no, ... it must be settled now. I don’t want any more
misunderstanding. I had better tell you ... everything ... though I’m
terribly ashamed....

AGI—Your highness?

ALEXANDRA—No, no, I can’t tell you....

AGI—I implore you, tell me. I—— [_Hopefully._] Tell me. Obey your heart.
Take courage, and tell me what above all things in the world I want to
hear....

ALEXANDRA—No, no; you are misunderstanding me again. But it’s my fault.
What I have to tell you is quite painful.

AGI—What is it, your highness?

ALEXANDRA—It’s about a deception that has been practiced on you.

AGI—A deception? [_There is a pause._]

ALEXANDRA—You are a gentleman, and you respect me.

AGI—Your highness....

ALEXANDRA—And I can rely on your discretion.

AGI—Yes.

ALEXANDRA—Absolutely?

AGI—Absolutely.

ALEXANDRA—Yes ... I know you to be a man of honor and a friend of the
family ... and I feel that I shall never have peace of mind again until
I tell you.... My family ... my mother has but one ambition in life,—to
restore our family to its throne. And to that end she wants me to marry
the Crown Prince.... You will understand ... it is not easy for me to
tell you this.... Every word I speak is like blood ... flowing from a
wound. ... Professor ... the Crown Prince showed no interest in me,
and my mother decided ... that if someone else were here ... some man
... to whom I could be attentive ... Albert’s interest in me ... might
be aroused.... I want you to believe, Professor, that I never meant to
hurt you ... and that I am sorry, if I have. Before to-night ... when I
was cold and formal with you ... it was because I knew that you were ...
not at ease ... in my presence. My mother asked me to invite you to the
ball to-night. I have never disobeyed her, but if I had known ... if I
could have foreseen ... that a man’s eyes would light up like that when
his heart was aflame ... that anyone would dare ... to look into my eyes
... as you have looked—— [_She pauses, walks slowly to the table, sits
down._] Now I have told you, Professor. Now you know how you have been
deceived. [_There is a pause._] Have you nothing to say?

AGI—[_His head is bowed._] You only obeyed orders.

ALEXANDRA—I don’t want to seem more blameless than I am. It is hateful
of me to put all the blame on mother. [_After a pause, she continues
earnestly, dreamily, almost sadly._] I want to be a queen. [_Lets her
head sink on her arm. There is a pause._]

AGI—[_Softly._] That means ... I may go now.

ALEXANDRA—Why do you say that?

AGI—I have served my purpose.

ALEXANDRA—[_Rises._] I am afraid I shouldn’t have told you. How strangely
you look at me! [_The music stops._]

AGI—Something is broken in me.... Why did you tell me?

ALEXANDRA—Shouldn’t I have told you?

AGI—Why did you tell me?

ALEXANDRA—Because I respect you. I want to be friends with you.

AGI—Do you? How touching!... Like the good princess in the fairy tale.
But I am not a lad any more ... to believe in fairy tales.

ALEXANDRA—Are you going to ... punish me?

AGI—I adore you ... humbly and hopelessly again. [_Bitterly, earnestly,
mockingly._] You needn’t be afraid of me. I know my place. I am still an
obedient servant to your illustrious family. And what though I may be
wounded a bit and bleeding, I cannot but be honored by the exalted rôle
that has been entrusted to me. It is even beginning to amuse and interest
me.

ALEXANDRA—You sound insincere.

AGI—Perhaps only bitter.

ALEXANDRA—[_Uneasily._] And I thought it was a kindness to tell you the
whole truth.

AGI—You have no further need of me. The bridegroom has caught fire; the
teacher cam be extinguished.

ALEXANDRA—I won’t have you think such things of me, or say such things to
me.

AGI—Have no fear. I am silent and I serve. Don’t look at me so
distrustfully. Let us smile and act as if nothing has happened. [_ALBERT
appears at back._] Can’t you smile? See, I can. We were talking about
the eagle. [_Louder._] And the head of the eagle—— [_ALBERT enters with
BEATRICE and the two ladies._]

ALBERT—Still here?

ALEXANDRA—The professor has been telling me such interesting things.
There is an uncommon astronomical spectacle to-night.

ALBERT—Where?

AGI—[_Uneasily._] In the sky, your highness.

ALBERT—I know that. But which stars?

AGI—It is not really anything uncommon. Only that a few so-called summer
stars may be observed to particularly good advantage to-night. Capella,
Arcturus, Vega and the constellation of the Eagle [_with significance_],
which consists of seven stars, which seven stars form a flying eagle; and
the head of the eagle....

ALBERT—[_Significantly._] I had no idea this was such an interesting
night.

ALEXANDRA—[_Nervously._] And the head of the eagle——

ALBERT—You are very much interested in the stars, aren’t you, Alexandra?

ALEXANDRA—I never thought much about them until to-night.

ALBERT—Thought more about roses—what? But to-night the sky is
illuminated—what? A beautiful summer night. [_Significantly._] The stars
shine like eyes.

BEATRICE—If you are interested, we have a very good observatory in the
tower.

ALBERT—Have you? I didn’t know.

ALEXANDRA—Oh, only an amateur’s observatory.

ALBERT—Doubtless the brilliant professor fitted it up. The young man of a
thousand talents ... what?

AGI—No, your highness, it was here when I came.

ALBERT—I wonder you didn’t mention it before.

ALEXANDRA—You go to bed so early. And the stars have no regard for
etiquette.

ALBERT—Bravo! That retort was so clever the Professor himself might have
thought of it. What?

ALEXANDRA—No, Albert. I thought of it myself.

ALBERT—[_To HYACINTH, who has just entered with SYMPHOROSA._] Did you
hear what she said?

HYACINTH—Who?

ALBERT—Xara. She said the stars have no regard for etiquette. [_A gong
sounds. CÆSAR, the two HUSSARS and ALFRED enter. The COLONEL enters back
left._]

BEATRICE—We dragged the doctor away from his beloved stars to-night.

HYACINTH—And also the poor boys.

SYMPHOROSA—Yes, the poor boys looked forward to it all day. They are
delighted with any excuse for not going to bed early.

HYACINTH—Well, they can see them to-morrow. Fortunately the stars are
eternal, eh? One can always put them off until to-morrow. [_The two
ladies exit back left._]

ALBERT—I didn’t know you had an observatory.

HYACINTH—Oh, yes. Ever since my late brother-in-law, Henry, bought a big
telescope. You have seen it often, colonel.

WUNDERLICH—Oh, yes. Once I burned my tongue up there.

ALBERT—With the telescope?

WUNDERLICH—No, your highness. There was some acid in a cup up there, and
I tasted it.

SYMPHOROSA—I can imagine what an impression it must have made on you.

WUNDERLICH—I shall never forget it, your highness.

BEATRICE—I think, Albert, it is time to eat something.

ALBERT—I hope to eat a great deal. I always have a ravenous appetite at
night. Haven’t I, Wunderlich?

WUNDERLICH—God be thanked, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—[_To AGI, low._] I shouldn’t like them to read in your face
what we have been talking about. [_ALEXANDRA and AGI stand down stage
left; HYACINTH and ALBERT at center, a trifle back; BEATRICE and
SYMPHOROSA down right in front of the table._]

ALBERT—Xara is absorbed in the science of the stars.

AGI—[_To ALEXANDRA._] I’ll try, your highness, but I am afraid it’s too
late.

BEATRICE—[_To ALBERT._] She takes a keen interest in the education of the
boys. She supervises their studies.

ALEXANDRA—That sounds as if you are threatening me.

ALBERT—Xara will be an astronomer yet.

HYACINTH—Hardly a career to attract a woman.

ALEXANDRA—I have offended you deeply.

AGI—Yes, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Won’t you forgive me?

AGI—No, your highness. [_ALBERT comes slowly toward ALEXANDRA._]

SYMPHOROSA—[_To BEATRICE, in an agitated whisper._] Something has
happened between them.

BEATRICE—Don’t say such things to frighten me, or I shall faint on the
spot. [_She moves toward AGI._]

ALBERT—[_As he joins ALEXANDRA._] Xara, will you leave the starry
firmament, and come down to earth a while? May I offer my arm?

ALEXANDRA—[_Takes his arm; nervously._] What an _unexpected_ honor, your
highness.

SYMPHOROSA—[_To BEATRICE._] See how excited he is. His ears are red.
Better send him away at once.

BEATRICE—Leave him to me. I’ll send him away.

ALBERT—[_Escorting ALEXANDRA slowly to the table._] First you neglect me,
and now you make fun of me.

ALEXANDRA—I neglect you? How can you say that? [_AGI has slowly followed
ALEXANDRA._]

BEATRICE—[_Intercepting him at center._] You seem to be in bad humor,
Professor.

AGI—No, your highness. If you will permit me to say so, this is the
happiest night of my life.

BEATRICE—But you do seem nervous ... and agitated.

AGI—It’s the unaccustomed surroundings, your highness.

HYACINTH—[_At the table, to ALEXANDRA._] You seem agitated, my child. But
no matter, you are all the prettier when your cheeks are flushed.

ALEXANDRA—[_At the table._] I always get flushed when I hear music.

BEATRICE—If you are tired, we will excuse you. Don’t forget you must be
up early in the morning.

AGI—I am not tired, your highness. On the contrary I am only beginning to
be awake.

ALBERT—[_To ALEXANDRA._] Do you love music?

BEATRICE—[_Calls to him._] She adores music. She sings, too!

ALBERT—And you never sang for me!

SYMPHOROSA—[_Who is standing with BEATRICE and AGI._] Don’t hesitate to
go, Professor, if you are sleepy.

AGI—Sleepy, your highness? Why, I just woke up ... not five minutes ago.

ALEXANDRA—[_To ALBERT._] I hesitate to sing for you. You know so much
about music.

ALBERT—I? About music? That’s capital! Did you hear that, Wunderlich?

WUNDERLICH—I heard, your highness.

BEATRICE—[_To AGI, again obstructing his way._] You _are_ in a bad humor,
Professor. Suppose we send your supper up to your room.

AGI—I’ll eat my supper here. [_BEATRICE is startled by his tone._]

ALBERT—Well, Aunt Beatrice, are you studying astronomy, too? Do you want
to starve us to death?

BEATRICE—[_Hurries to the table._] God forbid, dear Albert.

SYMPHOROSA—[_As she, too, goes to the table._] We are lost!

ALBERT—I have always observed that my appetite is keenest at night.

HYACINTH—There you are like Louis XIV.

BEATRICE—Shall we sit down? [_ALBERT and ALEXANDRA sit._] Sit here,
Professor. [_Indicates the place between SYMPHOROSA and her. But AGI sits
next to ALEXANDRA._]

AGI—Thank you.

BEATRICE—Not there, Professor ... here!

AGI—[_Does not stir._] This will do very well, thank you. [_Painful
silence. Shaking his head, HYACINTH sits._]

SYMPHOROSA—[_Whispers to BEATRICE._] We are lost! I know there’s going to
be a scandal.

ALBERT—The Bourbons had healthy appetites by day as well. Louis XVIII.
once consumed fifteen lamb chops at a public dinner. Imagine how much he
must have eaten when no one was looking. That disgusts you, doesn’t it,
Beatrice? You are not listening.

BEATRICE—[_Nervously._] Indeed I am. Louis XV. consumed eighteen lamb
chops.

ALBERT—No, it was the eighteenth Louis and the fifteenth lamb chop.
[_The lackeys, at the serving table, are preparing to serve the soup._]

BEATRICE—[_Sweetly._] I hope you like cold bouillon, Albert.

ALBERT—My favorite summer beverage.

BEATRICE—I am so glad.

SYMPHOROSA—[_Sweetly._] What a fortunate coincidence!

HYACINTH—How long they are taking to serve it.

BEATRICE—Here it comes now, dear. [_CÆSAR, the two HUSSARS and ALFRED
serve the soup._] You can’t keep it on the table, for it gets warm.
[_Each is served, and tastes the soup. Ceremonial silence._]

AGI—[_Unexpectedly, though not loudly, breaks the silence._] And the head
of the eagle—I really must finish that sentence—is a star called Altair
or Alpha Aquilæ, the star whose brilliant green radiance illuminates the
sky to-night. That is what I wanted to say.

ALEXANDRA—You had quite a difficult time reaching the end of that
sentence.

ALBERT—Doubtless the professor speaks so beautifully because Xara likes
to listen to him.

BEATRICE—It was beautiful, but I didn’t understand a word of it.

AGI—I don’t know how to speak beautifully. Her highness reproached me
with it just a while ago.

ALBERT—[_To ALEXANDRA._] Did you?

ALEXANDRA—Yes.

BEATRICE—[_To change the subject._] Is the soup cold enough, Albert?
[_Music begins._]

ALBERT—Just right.

WUNDERLICH—His highness likes his soup at eight degrees Celsius.

HYACINTH—Beautiful speech is not the most important thing. What counts is
the fact that he has studied a great deal, and knows a great deal.

AGI—Perhaps the reason I can’t speak well is that I have never done
anything but study.

HYACINTH—That never hurt you, my boy.

ALBERT—How many hours a day did you study?

AGI—Usually—ten.... And as many every night.

ALBERT—Ten and ten are twenty. [_He rises._]

BEATRICE—What are you looking for, my dear?

ALBERT—The salt.

WUNDERLICH—Here it is, your highness.

ALBERT—Thanks. [_Resumes his seat; takes the salt._] That left you four
hours for sleep.

AGI—Not that many—sometimes.

ALBERT—That is very bad. I need fifteen hours’ sleep myself. [_A pause._]

SYMPHOROSA—I need eight. [_A pause._]

HYACINTH—I need six. [_A pause._]

SYMPHOROSA—[_To WUNDERLICH._] And you? [_A long pause._]

WUNDERLICH—Two.

AGI—It is a matter of individual habit. For instance, Napoleon—— [_Stops
suddenly. A painful silence. Each sips his bouillon. The cups are put
down simultaneously._]

BEATRICE—And so you can’t speak properly because you’ve studied too much?

AGI—The many things one takes in from books must first dissolve
themselves in the blood, your highness. They must ferment like wine. Then
only will they release that beautiful bouquet, that fine fragrance called
poetry. There is a bit of poetry in every man, but many things must
happen before it becomes articulate.

ALBERT—A pretty woman ... what?

AGI—Perhaps....

BEATRICE—But ... Albert....

HYACINTH—It depends on the woman.... I have met women who stifled the
poetry in a man.

BEATRICE—They are quite right. I don’t like poets.

AGI—It depends on the man.... I have met men whom no woman can hurt. I
envy them.

ALEXANDRA—Why? [_The bouillon cups are removed._]

AGI—Because I am so easily hurt myself.

ALBERT—By women?

AGI—By any intense emotion. I am supersensitive, I suppose. What another
man would only laugh at—might do me irreparable injury.

ALBERT—But that is really unnecessary.

AGI—I know.

BEATRICE—And not very probable.

ALBERT—But I daresay you have had your experience with women.

AGI—No, your highness. Only with books. [_ALFRED serves from a platter.
Only HYACINTH, ALBERT and WUNDERLICH help themselves._]

ALBERT—Oh, come now!

AGI—It is true, your highness. My first taste of the world was here. I
came here straight from my books. And it would be a pity ... if anything
happened ... to drive me back to them again.

HYACINTH—It _would_ be a pity!

AGI—Please, don’t misunderstand me. It is not myself I am thinking about
... but—I have a mother ... and you see ... I am the only son ... all she
has. And I have a sister, too.... She isn’t pretty, poor girl, but I have
educated her ... done all I could for her. I’d like to see her happily
married ... and then—— [_Looks about him._] I beg your pardon, I didn’t
realize I was the only one speaking.

ALEXANDRA—Go on. Go on.... I am very much interested in what you are
saying.

AGI—And there is also my old teacher, Dr. Waldbrott.

HYACINTH—Of the University of Heidelberg?

AGI—Yes, father, he lectures there.

ALBERT—On what subject?

AGI—Astral Chemistry.

ALBERT—[_To HYACINTH._] Tell me what that is.

HYACINTH—The chemistry of the heavenly bodies.

ALBERT—Oh!

HYACINTH—I know the old gentleman. An admirable man and an eminent
scholar.

AGI—Yes, isn’t he? He ... honors me with his confidence.

ALBERT—Chemistry of the heavenly bodies?

AGI—Yes.

ALBERT—Yes. [_There is a pause._]

AGI—Dr. Waldbrott used to say to me that he would die happy if he could
be sure that I would continue his life’s work. He has entrusted his two
great theories ... to me.

ALBERT—I beg your pardon, but how many great theories had he altogether?

AGI—Two.

ALBERT—And he entrusted them both to you?

AGI—Yes.

ALBERT—Good!

AGI—It is a very important, a very serious trust, your highness.

ALBERT—Certainly, certainly.

AGI—It carries a grave responsibility.... My teacher, my mother and my
sister ... it is only on their account that I prize my insignificant life
... when it ... [_looks at ALEXANDRA_] when it’s in danger. [_Silence.
He raises his glass._] I drink to the welfare of the beautiful young
princess. [_Drains the glass in a single gulp. SYMPHOROSA nudges BEATRICE
repeatedly with her elbow._]

ALBERT—Prosit! That was a mighty draught! [_Smiling, he nudges his
neighbors._]

HYACINTH—That was the draught of a novice. One doesn’t drink heavy wine
like this so quickly.

AGI—I didn’t know, father. I never had the pleasure of drinking it before.

HYACINTH—Then let me introduce you with appropriate ceremony. This is
Tokay, my boy, and of the very oldest.

BEATRICE—And it is drunk with dessert, and not with the soup.

HYACINTH—A two-fold error: you drank too soon and you drank too much.

AGI—I didn’t know, father. I must own it was the first glass of wine I
ever drank in my life.

HYACINTH—Not really?

AGI—Really, father.... There, you see, that, too, had to happen to-night.
[_ALEXANDRA empties her own glass._]

BEATRICE—Alexandra!

HYACINTH—[_Takes ALEXANDRA’S glass._] And I had just finished saying that
one doesn’t drink this wine so fast.

ALBERT—It’s plain to see why Xara did it.

HYACINTH—Why?

ALBERT—To keep the professor in countenance.

BEATRICE—It was quite unnecessary. You never take any wine.

ALEXANDRA—I do to-night, mother. [_To ALBERT._] Albert ... see that this
old professor gets some appointment. Waldbrott—that was his name, wasn’t
it?

HYACINTH—Waldbrott—yes.

ALBERT—If you wish it—I can write to Berlin. Please, Wunderlich, make a
note of it.

WUNDERLICH—[_Writes in his notebook._] I am making a note of it, your
highness.

ALEXANDRA—What sort of appointment can one get for a man like that?

AGI—That’s just it—none at all.

ALBERT—Surely the Emperor can do something for him.

AGI—Hardly, your highness. The man serves a greater lord.

ALBERT—A greater lord than the Emperor?

AGI—One much greater. [_Points upwards._] He is an astronomer.

ALEXANDRA—I should like to meet your sister.

AGI—She is in Dresden, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Do you love her very much?

AGI—Very much, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—A stupid question to ask, wasn’t it?

BEATRICE—[_Uneasily._] Yes, my child, it was.

AGI—No, your highness, it was a clever question because it is a pleasure
to answer it. I love my sister with all my heart. In my darkest hours I
think of her. For she has the indomitable faith that I cannot be crushed,
that I am a world unto myself.

ALBERT—[_Somewhat ironically._] A whole world?

AGI—Yes, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—How beautiful.

ALBERT—Isn’t that a great deal?

AGI—[_Courageously._] No, your highness. As an astronomer one learns that
the tiniest speck is not to be despised. [_With significance._] Those
little specks in the sky ... every single one ... is a great world.

ALBERT—Every one?

AGI—[_More bravely._] Every one!

ALBERT—[_A bit sharply._] Perhaps they only think so, these little specks.

AGI—[_Still more bravely, though not loudly._] Oh, I know it is difficult
for the great lords to realize. They say: “Ten million inhabitants make
an army of two millions.” ... Yet it is true that, among all these
millions, each individual is a world in himself, a world which may not be
destroyed.

BEATRICE—[_Uneasily._] But, Professor, who is trying to destroy any
worlds?

AGI—Women, for example, do it with a smile. [_To ALEXANDRA._] Your
highness, why do you look at me so fixedly?

ALEXANDRA—I like what you are saying.

AGI—[_To BEATRICE._] And your highness looks at me so uneasily. Perhaps
you don’t like what I’m saying.

BEATRICE—[_Coldly._] That is not the tone in which you are accustomed to
speak to me, Professor.

AGI—[_Bitterly._] I am in very good humor to-night.

BEATRICE—Better than we care for, Professor.

ALEXANDRA—[_Soothingly._] Mother, we are at a ball and are drinking
champagne.... [_Raises her glass._]

BEATRICE—I am astonished, Professor.

SYMPHOROSA—[_In alarm, suddenly._] Albert, I commend the salmon to you.
It is the pride of our chef.

ALBERT—I say, he does put it well. That’s why Xara is so interested.
What’s that about the salmon? [_To SYMPHOROSA._] Did you say something
about the salmon?

SYMPHOROSA—It’s the pride of our chef.

ALBERT—Oh, is it?... But what has that to do with it?

SYMPHOROSA—Nothing. I just mentioned it.

ALBERT—Oh! Yes! Well! Little specks in the sky. Astronomy. Romance. Empty
phrases.

AGI—[_Heatedly._] No, not empty phrases, your highness.

ALBERT—Oh, yes, they are. Phrases for women. To impress them. Every star
a world in itself!

AGI—[_Belligerently._] Not every star, your highness.

ALBERT—No?

AGI—No. The big white moon, for example, ... it makes a huge,
pretentious, glittering show, yet it has no light of its own. It only
reflects the light of the sun. On the other hand, there is the modest
little star called Vega, which you seem to hold in such contempt ...
its light is a thousand times stronger than the light of the sun.
[_SYMPHOROSA nudges BEATRICE._]

ALBERT—Its modesty is charming, under the circumstances.

AGI—[_Sharply._] It isn’t modesty, your highness. It is only remoteness.

ALBERT—It is fitting for remote things to glimmer modestly.

AGI—[_Openly truculent._] It only seems so to your highness. To me,
because I know what it is, it shines in its true value; and so I proudly
proclaim that it is more brilliant than the sun, and that its brilliance
is its own.... [_Puts his hand on his chest._] Its own!

ALBERT—[_Smiling._] Possibly, Professor. It seems I do not understand
these things.

AGI—[_Decidedly._] No, your highness.

BEATRICE—[_To SYMPHOROSA in a harrowed whisper._] I can’t bear it any
longer.

ALBERT—Charming! Charming! At last a man who tells me to my face that
there is something I do not understand.

AGI—[_Stubbornly._] No, your highness doesn’t know anything about it.

ALBERT—[_Forcing himself to seem pleased._] In twenty years I haven’t
heard anyone so outspoken. Professor, I admire you not only as an
astronomer, but as a man. I am charmed with your candor.

AGI—[_As if offended._] It makes no difference to me whether you like it
or not.

ALBERT—[_Jovially._] There’s candor for you! Charming! I’m really
enjoying myself here.

BEATRICE—[_Weakly._] Oh! [_She rises suddenly, sways. General
consternation._]

ALBERT—[_Puts down his glass._] What’s the matter, Aunt Beatrice? [_He
rises._] Aunt Beatrice! Tu te trouves mal?

BEATRICE—[_Weakly._] My head ... all of a sudden.... Laisse moi ... je
vous en prie—forgive me.... [_WUNDERLICH has gone to her assistance and
is supporting her._] Merci, mon colonel.... Never mind.... [_The HUSSARS
swiftly draw the portières across both big arches. WUNDERLICH leaves
BEATRICE and crosses to left._]

ALBERT—Tu te trouves mal, Tante Béatrice?

BEATRICE—I am sorry ... a little weakness ... please don’t bother ...
I’ll retire.

WUNDERLICH—[_To CÆSAR._] Have that music stopped. [_CÆSAR whispers to
ALFRED, who hurries off. The music stops._]

ALBERT—[_Takes BEATRICE’S arm._] I don’t doubt that you exerted yourself
too much to-day. Let me see you to your room.

HYACINTH—Don’t bother, Albert. I’ll take her up.

ALBERT—No, no. Stay here ... everybody. [_To SYMPHOROSA, who is about to
accompany them._] Symphorosa, you stay here with the salmon. Please sit
down, Xara. No excitement. I’ll look after her.

BEATRICE—[_In a faint voice._] No excitement ... with a houseful of
strangers ... oh ... oh!

ALBERT—All right, my dear ... everything will be all right. [_To the
others._] I wish you all to remain here, please. [_Goes toward left,
supporting BEATRICE._] As if nothing had happened. [_As he passes
CÆSAR._] Why has the music stopped?

WUNDERLICH—[_Answers for CÆSAR._] I thought your highness would prefer no
music during this unfortunate——

ALBERT—[_Leading BEATRICE slowly off._] Let the music continue. The more
the better! [_CÆSAR makes a sign to ALFRED, who exits._]

BEATRICE—Pardonnez moi ... merci, mon cher. ... [_ALBERT and BEATRICE
exit._]

WUNDERLICH—[_As he follows them._] Music. [_He looks at CÆSAR. There is
a brief pause, and the music begins again. Beaming with satisfaction,
WUNDERLICH exits. All except SYMPHOROSA resume their seats._]

AGI—Is your highness ill, too?

SYMPHOROSA—No.

AGI—Well, then——

SYMPHOROSA—I don’t know what to do.

AGI—Why not follow their highnesses? And let the music continue. The more
the better!

SYMPHOROSA—[_Crosses to left; looks at ALEXANDRA._] What are you going to
do? [_ALEXANDRA rises, undecided._]

HYACINTH—Stay here. Your mother forbade you to leave.

SYMPHOROSA—[_To HYACINTH._] And you?

HYACINTH—See here, my dear; I love Beatrice very much, but she has been
having these delicate attacks for thirty years. And I have seen too many
of them to be alarmed. If they strike her standing, she sits down ... and
if they strike her sitting, she rises.

SYMPHOROSA—Karl!

HYACINTH—[_Earnestly._] The situation here is much more serious. I warned
you this afternoon.

SYMPHOROSA—What a misfortune! [_She exits at left. CÆSAR withdraws.
HYACINTH, AGI and ALEXANDRA are left alone. There is a pause. ALEXANDRA
sits on the tabouret, down right._]

HYACINTH—[_Severely._] Well, my son, you see what mischief you have done.

ALEXANDRA—[_Greatly agitated._] It was my fault, Hyacinth. I am entirely
to blame. That is why I stayed ... to....

HYACINTH—Don’t excite yourself, my child. Let us talk it over calmly.
That is why I stayed. You have nothing to fear while I am here. [_To
AGI._] But you have.

AGI—[_Sits._] No, father, I’m not afraid.

ALEXANDRA—It wasn’t his fault. How deeply hurt he must have been, to do
such a thing! I am so unhappy, Hyacinth! [_She buries her face in the
robe of HYACINTH, who it standing beside her._]

HYACINTH—Calm yourself, dear.

AGI—[_Rises; vehemently._] I couldn’t endure it any longer, father, I
couldn’t.... God is my witness, I tried. But I am only human, father, and
... in love ... I hardly knew what I was saying....

HYACINTH—Tell me, my son, are you angry with me, too?

AGI—How could I be, father?

HYACINTH—Then don’t shout like that. I can hear you. And I understand you
too, my son.

AGI—[_Grandiosely; excitedly._] I am done for, but I shan’t sell my life
cheaply. Not even to this beautiful daughter of a king. Yesterday—no,
this very afternoon, I would have given it for her handkerchief. But now
that blood has been let, I hold it dearly.

HYACINTH—What you have done——

AGI—I am ready to face the consequences.

HYACINTH—I knew you would be, my son.

AGI—[_Very grandiosely._] I am ready to answer for it: to anybody—to the
family, to the prince, or to his adjutant with swords or any weapons they
choose. But what I did I had to do. And there is more I have to do.

HYACINTH—More?

AGI—Yes, more.

HYACINTH—And this is our serious young scientist! [_To ALEXANDRA._] Well,
my girl, see what we have come to. Here we are. [_Reproachfully._] How
do you like it?

ALEXANDRA—Come here.

HYACINTH—[_Goes to her._] Well?

ALEXANDRA—Sit down here. [_He does so._]

HYACINTH—Well?

ALEXANDRA—Now ask me again how I like it.

HYACINTH—How do you like it?

ALEXANDRA—[_On his shoulder, low._] Hyacinth ... I like it very much.

HYACINTH—[_Astonished._] Upon my soul! The thing is worse than I thought.
[_Moves nearer to her._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Still on his shoulder._] Hyacinth ... dear Hyacinth ... I ...
I....

HYACINTH—Well, my child? What is it? Out with it!

ALEXANDRA—Hyacinth ... that glass of wine ... it was the first I ever
drank in my life, too.

HYACINTH—For a first drink it was a hearty one.

ALEXANDRA—[_With a glance at AGI._] For his sake, Hyacinth. So that they
wouldn’t laugh at him.

HYACINTH—Fancy that! You amaze me. And how did it taste?

ALEXANDRA—[_Delighted._] Made me ... fuddled ... and warm.... I wish I
could die like this ... but first I want the professor to forgive me.

AGI—How _can_ I forgive you?

HYACINTH—Silence! There, there, I forgive you for him, my dear.
[_ALEXANDRA dries her tears._] Have your cry out, and don’t worry about
it.

ALEXANDRA—That’s not why I am crying, Hyacinth.

HYACINTH—Why, then?

ALEXANDRA—Because I ... am sorry ... for him.

AGI—You needn’t be sorry for me.

HYACINTH—[_Mildly._] You are not to speak now, my son.

ALEXANDRA—I have never been as sorry for anyone....

HYACINTH—And when he looks at you, you are sorrier for him than ever.

ALEXANDRA—[_Looks at AGI._] When he looks at me, his eyes scorch my face
... just as when you open the door of a stove——

HYACINTH—Yes, yes. The door of a stove. And what then?

ALEXANDRA—[_In child-like surprise._] And then ... then ... his glance
seems to enter my breast ... and touch ... my heart ... just as you touch
a key of the piano with one finger ... very softly.

HYACINTH—A key of the piano. Yes, yes ... and what else?...

ALEXANDRA—When he speaks ... since I hurt him ... when he speaks, his
voice rings in my consciousness for a long time after.... Like a bell.
And that hurts. I pity him so.

HYACINTH—[_Concerned._] I see, my dear. Only I am afraid it is neither
remorse nor pity.

ALEXANDRA—What then?

HYACINTH—A bit of internal disorder ... the lungs ... the heart....
[_Puts his ear to her chest._] Take a deep breath. Now sigh. [_ALEXANDRA
sighs._] Say, “Professor.”

ALEXANDRA—[_Looks at AGI._] Professor....

HYACINTH—[_Dryly._] The heart.

ALEXANDRA—[_Sorrowfully, reproachfully._] You are making fun of me,
Hyacinth.

HYACINTH—Not at all, my child. The matter is very serious. Tell me, dear.
When ... did you begin ... er ... to pity him so?

ALEXANDRA—Before. Here in this room.... Quite suddenly.... He said
something——

HYACINTH—What did he say?

ALEXANDRA—[_Looks at AGI._] He will remember the word.

HYACINTH—What was it, my son?

AGI—I know, father. It was when I said that I, too, was a world in
myself.

ALEXANDRA—No.

AGI—No? Well, then it was before that ... when I spoke of the poetry of
hopelessness.

ALEXANDRA—No.

HYACINTH—Well, what was it he said that touched you so?

ALEXANDRA—[_To HYACINTH._] He said: “Lad.”

HYACINTH—Lad? [_She nods._] What did he say “lad” for?

ALEXANDRA—He said he wasn’t a lad any more to believe in fairy tales.

HYACINTH—Oh, that was it?

ALEXANDRA—[_Smiles happily as if in a dream._] You know ... I had always
known the word, but I had never heard it spoken before. We say “boy,”
don’t we?... And he, poor fellow, said “lad,” with such a quaint lilt to
it ... so sweetly ... I knew at once it was what they used to call him at
home ... what his family calls him to this very day.... And ... I don’t
know why ... but suddenly it seemed as if I, too, had been there ... in
the village where they called him “lad” ... I saw the tiny, spotless
cottages with acacia trees around them ... and his mother ... and his
sister ... who called him “lad” ... and loved him, and were proud of
him.... That was why. [_There is a brief pause._]

HYACINTH—Well, my boy—what do you say to that?

ALEXANDRA—Hyacinth, what did you call him?

HYACINTH—My lad ... of course, that’s what I meant.

ALEXANDRA—You dear! [_Embraces him delightedly._]

HYACINTH—[_While she embraces him, to AGI._] See that? I understand women.

AGI—[_Touched._] She’s beautiful ... and good ... I’ve forgiven her long
ago.

ALEXANDRA—But I can’t forgive myself. Never, never! [_With a start._]
What are we thinking? [_Suddenly._] And poor mother.... [_She is about to
rise._]

HYACINTH—Stay, my child, I wouldn’t go up to her now. Compose yourself
first, and then we shall go up together.

AGI—[_Crosses to the table._] Your mother was very cruel. [_Sits at the
place where HYACINTH had been sitting._]

ALEXANDRA—I’m sorry for that too. I’m sorry for everything now. And yet
I’m so happy here. [_Embraces HYACINTH._] And you are sweet ... and good
... and strong ... and you understand one so well.

HYACINTH—The curious thing about you two is that I ought to be severe
with you.... And I shall be severe with you. The moment you showed signs
of getting out of control your mother dropped the reins. And now I must
take them in hand. [_Very gravely; rises._] This affair must end here,
my dear children. It can’t go any further. I trust you both realize
that. Fortunately, you are both too clever not to realize it. I am very
sorry. Sorry for you too, my son. [_More severely, to AGI._] Your conduct
here to-day.... Oh, you needn’t be so depressed about it. How can I go
on when you look at me like that? Now, see here. [_Begins over again._]
Your conduct to-day was—— [_His tone changes._] I wish you wouldn’t
look at me so knowingly. It confuses me. You are just as bad as she is
... [_to ALEXANDRA_] and you needn’t look so pleased. You have no cause
to.... This is unheard of! [_Walks a few paces._] Unheard of! [_Comes
to a standstill; bursts out angrily._] You sit there. You don’t say a
word. You just look at me. And one can’t say what one means. [_To AGI,
beginning all over again._] Your conduct to-night was ... I must say——
[_Cannot look AGI in the eye._] I must say ... it was really ... quite
justifiable. There! I’ve said it. [_To ALEXANDRA, crossly._] Why do you
look at me so affectionately?

ALEXANDRA—[_Delighted._] You are looking at me affectionately, Hyacinth.

HYACINTH—[_Crossly._] That’s the worst of it. Yes, that’s the worst
of it. When I look at you, I ... when I look at you ... like this....
Unheard of! I look at you ... and my heart aches for you.... But you
... you children ... you are young ... unspoiled ... and I ... no, I
wasn’t born to be a judge. I try to be ... but I try in vain. I can’t
... judge you. There you sit ... two fine young people ... and in such a
desperate plight ... but so happy in spite of it ... you will never be
as happy again. Happiness flies past like the wind. You have scarcely
felt it before it is gone.... And then comes the reality, to which you
will awake to-morrow morning ... which will separate you, and which will
be for the best.... But it will hurt a little, my dear children. It will
hurt ... such things have happened before.... Even to me ... when I wore
a uniform. A long, long time ago. [_He turns away. There is a pause.
He goes to the table, picks up his glass. Softly._] To your happiness.
[_Raises the glass, sips the wine, sits at the place which AGI had
occupied during supper. There is a pause during which ALEXANDRA and AGI
sit motionless. CÆSAR enters quietly._]

HYACINTH—What is it, my friend?

CÆSAR—[_Quietly._] Her highness requests the reverend father to go and
see her.

HYACINTH—At once?

CÆSAR—Her highness used the word: “Immediately.”

HYACINTH—She would send for me now, just as I am beginning to enjoy my
supper!

CÆSAR—[_In consternation._] Didn’t the reverend father like the soup?

HYACINTH—Soup? [_Rises._] Bitter, hot tea is what you gave me.

CÆSAR—Oh! Oh! Your reverence! What an error! Oh, I could kill myself.

HYACINTH—I forbid you to kill yourself, though I’m sure you had no such
intention. And I’d forbid you to scold the unfortunate waiter who made
the error, if I didn’t know you’d do it anyhow. I’ll be back directly,
children.

ALEXANDRA—[_Rises._] But Hyacinth! We can’t stay here alone. Hadn’t I
better go with you?

CÆSAR—Her highness, the Princess Symphorosa, asked her highness, your
mother, whether she wanted to see your highness.

ALEXANDRA—What did she say?

CÆSAR—Her highness ... so to speak ... expressed herself ... to the
effect that——

ALEXANDRA—What did she say?

CÆSAR—Her highness said: “Let her keep out of my sight.” [_There is a
pause. CÆSAR steps back and whispers to ALFRED._]

HYACINTH—You see, my child! Just stay where you are while I speak to
your mother. You needn’t envy me the task. Then I shall come back and
fetch you. [_He exits at left. ALFRED exits. There is a pause._]

ALEXANDRA—[_After the pause, during which she has repeatedly looked at
AGI._] Please ... I don’t even know your first name. What is it?

AGI—Hans.

ALEXANDRA—How old are you?

AGI—Twenty-nine.

ALEXANDRA—Where were you born?

AGI—In Transylvania.

ALEXANDRA—What district?

AGI—[_In surprise._] Your highness ... at last we are left alone ... and
you ask me questions like a census taker.

ALEXANDRA—[_Embarrassed; helplessly._] I want to know you. I want to hear
all about you as quickly as possible. [_Almost in tears._] But I don’t
know how to go about it.

AGI—Have you thought of to-morrow morning?

ALEXANDRA—I don’t want to think about that yet. The few moments we have
together now ... mustn’t be spoiled ... for you or for me——

AGI—To-morrow they’ll sweep me out like rubbish.

ALEXANDRA—And what if I don’t let them, Hans?

AGI—Just the same, I shall go. Just the same.

ALEXANDRA—[_Notices CÆSAR._] What are you waiting for?

CÆSAR—For your orders, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—[_Comes toward him._] There is nothing. You may go.

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness. [_But he does not move._]

ALEXANDRA—You may go.

CÆSAR—Leave the room, your highness?

ALEXANDRA—At once, Cæsar.

CÆSAR—Your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Yes?

CÆSAR—It appears that I myself served Father Hyacinth the tea instead of
soup. But then so many extraordinary things have happened to-night, it is
no wonder——

ALEXANDRA—You may go, Cæsar.

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness. I am certain the world is coming to an end,
your highness. [_He sobs and exits weeping at left. AGI goes to door
through which CÆSAR made his exit, and remains standing there, looking at
ALEXANDRA. There is a pause._]

AGI—[_After a glance into the ballroom._] The ballroom is empty. The
guests are leaving. [_Speaks softly with passionate warmth._] And now we
are quite alone, princess. Perhaps only for a few minutes ... and then
all that was beautiful in my life ... will be gone.

ALEXANDRA—[_Trembling._] I have never before ... been alone with a man.

AGI—[_Comes toward her._] Are you afraid of me?

ALEXANDRA—I don’t know. But if it’s fear ... then I want always to be
afraid.

AGI—The last time ... perhaps the last moment I shall see you. Do you
love me?

ALEXANDRA—[_Almost stammering; like a child._] If it’s love ... then ...
it’s just the same as ... when I was a little girl ... and the Emperor
came. [_He regards her in astonishment._] Yes ... I had seen many
portraits of the Emperor ... with a golden crown on his head ... in all
his glitter and glory ... and then once, when he visited us, in civilian
clothes—— [_Regretfully._] I didn’t recognize him.

AGI—My beautiful princess! [_Comes nearer to her._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Trembling._] Don’t come too near, Hans.

AGI—Are you so afraid of me? [_Takes her hand._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Draws back._] I don’t like ... you to touch me.... How cold
your hand is!

AGI—No. It’s yours that’s hot. What are you thinking that makes your
hand tremble in mine?

ALEXANDRA—Of something reckless, and——

AGI—And of what?

ALEXANDRA—And of my rank, Hans. [_There is a pause. ALEXANDRA glances
toward the table._] Won’t you have something to eat?

AGI—No.

ALEXANDRA—Why won’t you eat?

AGI—I am not hungry. [_Turns to her ardently._] I’m thirsty.

ALEXANDRA—[_Trembling._] Will you drink something?

AGI—No. I am thirsty for you, for your mouth and your eyes ... and your
voice....

ALEXANDRA—[_Terrified._] You mustn’t look at me like that!

AGI—[_Passionately._] When I look into your eyes ... deep into your eyes
... we seem to be mounting together on the crest of a flame——

ALEXANDRA—[_In alarm._] What do you mean?

AGI—Upward ... ever upward ... higher ... along the path....

ALEXANDRA—[_Alarmed, child-like._] What path are you talking about?

AGI—[_Coming nearer to her._] The path you pointed out to me.... Before,
I lacked the courage to realize ... that I am the rival of a king. But
now I know it. And now I know I have won. Before, I only stammered, but
now, now I want to sing ... because I have triumphed, triumphed over
every obstacle.... And now——

ALEXANDRA—[_Stares at him in terror._] And now?

AGI—I know that to-morrow my triumph will be over. [_Takes her hands._]
But to-night, your highness, we shall see who is king, he or I!

ALEXANDRA—[_Faint with terror._] You frighten me!

AGI—My silence should have frightened you more.

ALEXANDRA—[_Terrified._] Now ... you want to take your revenge....

AGI—I love you.

ALEXANDRA—[_Looks terror-stricken into his eyes._] How you hate me now——

AGI—And I won’t have you pity me! Soon they will all come back. Another
minute and I’ll be a servant again. A dismissed servant! Must it end like
that? Can’t I even make you arrogant again? Can’t I make you insult me
... so that in my rage I may take you in my arms and carry you off ...
out into the night ... among your roses ... and kiss that haughty mouth....
[_He is about to embrace her._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Terrified, but resisting him affectionately rather than
resentfully._] Hans! Hans! [_There is a noise off left. They separate
slowly._] [_There is a pause. CÆSAR enters at left, leaving the double
doors open behind him._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Goes slowly towards him._] What do you want?

CÆSAR—His highness, the Crown Prince, is preparing to retire. He has
received a telegram. His mother, the Royal Princess Maria Dominica, is
coming to-morrow morning.

ALEXANDRA—His mother? Coming here?

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness! [_There is a long pause._]

CÆSAR—I take the liberty to report that his highness, the Crown Prince,
will shortly pass through this room.

ALEXANDRA—[_Nervously._] Hyacinth isn’t back yet ... and we are here ...
like this ... we two....

CÆSAR—If your highness should desire to go through the yellow room ...
there is still time. [_He indicates the doors back left._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Proudly._] How dare you, Cæsar? Are you drunk?

CÆSAR—[_Tragically._] No, your highness, I beg pardon, I’m sure. I’ve
only gone out of my mind.

ALEXANDRA—That will do, Cæsar. [_He bows and crosses to left. There is
a pause. Through the door at left come two lackeys bearing lighted
candelabra. Behind them come ALBERT, WUNDERLICH and LUETZEN. The
procession passes slowly across the stage. When ALBERT comes abreast
of the table he stops, smiling. The two lackeys with the candelabra
reach the door at right, open it and take their places on either side.
WUNDERLICH and LUETZEN pause on the threshold._]

ALBERT—[_Unaffectedly pleasant._] My dear Xara, how fortunate still to
find you here and bid you good night. [_Extends his hand._] I was to have
gone to-morrow. But now I am happy to tell you that my mother arrives in
the morning. Or did you know it?

ALEXANDRA—They told me, Albert. I am very glad.

ALBERT—She is extremely fond of you.

ALEXANDRA—I am fond of her too, Albert, very.

ALBERT—Your mother has gone to bed. But she feels much better. She did
a bit too much to-day. I warned her not to. But she is such a charming
hostess, she wouldn’t heed my advice. [_HYACINTH enters at left,
followed, a few moments later, by SYMPHOROSA. HYACINTH comes slowly into
the room. SYMPHOROSA lingers in the doorway._]

ALEXANDRA—Mother is never happier than when she is making her guests
comfortable.

ALBERT—But one shouldn’t overdo it. I have really reproached myself
on her account. My mother will scold me for it too. But, happily, it’s
nothing serious. Good night, Xara. [_Extends his hand to her. ALEXANDRA
courtesies low._]

ALBERT—[_As if he had just noticed AGI._] Ah, the professor! Good
night, Professor. Your discourse was very interesting ... particularly
the manner of delivery.... Very original, yes ... a bit belligerent,
but original. As her highness was taken ill so suddenly, I hadn’t the
opportunity to offer my very humble comment. I would never have supposed
that you could be such an insubordinate young fool.

ALEXANDRA—[_Uneasily, forcing a smile._] Albert, you are mistaken——

ALBERT—No, no, these astronomical impertinences are very interesting.
[_To HYACINTH._] He sat down with us quite unassumingly and then with a
flourish he lifted us up to the sky ... and he stayed up there ... and
dropped me with a thud.... [_To AGI._] But you spoke with spirit. Very
smart.... Always higher, higher——

ALEXANDRA—Pardon me, but your sarcastic criticism is unjust, Albert. He
is not like us.

ALBERT—I noticed that.

ALEXANDRA—[_More and more excitedly._] He is a scientist; he is a free
spirit.... He has the right to speak more freely than we....

ALBERT—You defend his bad manners just as graciously as you suffered them
a while ago. You are a brave and clever girl—a perfect martyr. I have
just learned from your mother that you ... [_sarcastically_] were the
innocent target of certain unwelcome attentions ... and that you have
endured them with such patience, such goodness....

ALEXANDRA—[_Very agitated; looks from ALBERT to AGI in fear that they
will quarrel._] Mother is mistaken, Albert. And you judge him wrongly.
You don’t understand him.

ALBERT—[_Ironically._] It is not easy to understand him.

ALEXANDRA—[_Excitedly._] You can’t possibly understand him. [_ALBERT
laughs mockingly._] Don’t laugh at him, Albert. He is a scientist and a
poet.... He is an astronomer.

ALBERT—An ill-bred little astronomer.

AGI—[_With a threatening movement._] Your highness!

ALEXANDRA—[_Trembling with excitement; passionately._] Albert, you are
going too far. You must not say that.

ALBERT—But he is.

ALEXANDRA—I won’t have him insulted ... like this——

AGI—[_To ALBERT._] Your highness, I——

ALBERT—[_Quite composed._] You are an impertinent little upstart. [_With
a little shriek of dismay ALEXANDRA throws herself in front of AGI. She
is highly excited._] Don’t answer him, Hans. [_Looks at him._] I forbid
it. [_Raises her voice._] Hans! [_For a moment she hesitates, looks at
ALBERT, then throws herself on AGI, embraces him passionately, kisses him
and rests a moment against his chest. On the thresholds of the four doors
the people stand as follows: At left, SYMPHOROSA; at right, two lackeys
with candles, and LUETZEN; back right, WUNDERLICH alone. At the moment of
the kiss they all withdraw slowly. HYACINTH does not go. He only takes a
few steps backwards. ALEXANDRA releases AGI, stands a moment stiff and
staring, then leans half fainting against the edge of the table._]

ALBERT—[_Lightly, softly, ironically._] Oh! That’s different. Quite
different. In that case ... I beg your pardon, Professor. [_Makes a
military bow to ALEXANDRA and AGI._] Good night. [_He exits at right.
There is a pause. SYMPHOROSA enters at left and leads the half swooning
ALEXANDRA gently, tenderly off back left. When they both have gone,
HYACINTH approaches AGI gravely, almost threateningly, stops in front of
him and kisses him suddenly. Smiling graciously, HYACINTH hurries off at
left. AGI stares after him._]

THE CURTAIN FALLS




ACT THREE




ACT THREE


    _Early morning of the following day. A salon of the guest suite
    assigned to MARIA DOMINICA. Doors at right and left. At back,
    on the left, is the entrance from the hallway. When the curtain
    rises SYMPHOROSA is speaking to the CHAMBERMAID._

SYMPHOROSA—We do not know how soon her highness Maria Dominica may
arrive. Her telegram said this morning, but there is no train in the
morning, so she must be coming by motor. That means we may look for her
at any moment.

CHAMBERMAID—Yes, your highness. [_BEATRICE enters at left._]

SYMPHOROSA—[_Hurries to her and embraces her._] Darling ... why are you
up so early? It’s barely seven o’clock. There, there!... Do you feel
better?

BEATRICE—[_Unhappily._] I haven’t slept. I never closed an eye, I was so
restless.... Is the guest suite ready?

CHAMBERMAID—Everything is in perfect order.

BEATRICE—[_Tearfully._] The bath?

CHAMBERMAID—We have just lit the fire. The water will be warm in half an
hour. [_At a nod from BEATRICE she exits at right._]

BEATRICE—Is she to have these three rooms?

SYMPHOROSA—Yes. This salon—— [_Points to the right_] and that one; the
bedroom with the dressing room; and the bath. [_BEATRICE dries her eyes._]

SYMPHOROSA—Don’t cry, dear. The good Lord will help us.

BEATRICE—Only He _can_ help us now. When does Dominica arrive?

SYMPHOROSA—Can’t tell exactly. She is coming by motor.

BEATRICE—If she had only come yesterday—even yesterday evening——

SYMPHOROSA—[_Sighs._] Ah, yes....

BEATRICE—This beautiful summer day! And to think that it is the most
tragic day of my life! Could you ever have believed that Maria Dominica
would be on her way to ask my daughter’s hand in marriage with her son
... and I awaiting her in tears? [_Weeps._]

SYMPHOROSA—My dear! [_Embraces her._]

BEATRICE—How _is_ Albert?

SYMPHOROSA—He is asleep.

BEATRICE—Fortunate man! And Alexandra?

SYMPHOROSA—She came down at six, and went riding. Alone. I hear you
talked with her last night.

BEATRICE—Yes. She came to my bedside at three o’clock. Oh, that I had
been spared that interview!

SYMPHOROSA—Was she disrespectful?

BEATRICE—No, she was repentant. She told me everything—everything that
happened.

SYMPHOROSA—The very last thing too?

BEATRICE—If only she hadn’t told me that!

SYMPHOROSA—What did you say to her?

BEATRICE—Not a word. I wasn’t able to. My whole body turned to ice.

SYMPHOROSA—What did she do?

BEATRICE—Kissed my hand and went out. I haven’t seen her since. [_A brief
pause._] That man—is he still here?

SYMPHOROSA—He is here—but——

BEATRICE—[_Explosively._] He is here?

SYMPHOROSA—Yes, but——

BEATRICE—There is no _but_ which can justify his being here still.

SYMPHOROSA— ... But he is packing his trunk.

BEATRICE—[_To the CHAMBERMAID who has entered at right._] Well?

CHAMBERMAID—Your highness, a motor is entering the grounds. You can see
it from the window. There are two ladies in it.

BEATRICE—Now my Calvary begins. Symphorosa—don’t leave me. Where is
Hyacinth?

SYMPHOROSA—Gone out for a walk.

BEATRICE—I don’t want to see him. Last night I sent for him to give him a
scolding.

SYMPHOROSA—Yes?

BEATRICE—And he scolded me instead. Let him keep out of my sight.

SYMPHOROSA—Why are you so angry with him?

BEATRICE—Because he was right.

CÆSAR—[_Enters at left._] Your highness, the motor has driven up.

BEATRICE—We’re coming, we’re coming. [_She exits quickly with SYMPHOROSA.
CÆSAR exits at back. The door remains open. Off stage their voices are
heard in an exchange of greetings. DOMINICA enters with BEATRICE and
SYMPHOROSA. She wears a motoring coat. Behind her comes the COUNTESS,
who helps her off with the coat, hat and veil and gives them to the
CHAMBERMAID, who exits at right, taking the things with her._]

DOMINICA—[_Animatedly continuing the conversation begun outside._]
... simply by starting at four this morning, my dear. I’m not fond of
travelling by day in the summertime. I can’t endure the heat. The car ran
beautifully. Barely three hours. And the distance is over two hundred
kilometers.

BEATRICE—Well, what time did you rise?

DOMINICA—At half-past two. While you were still dancing here. [_BEATRICE
sighs._]

SYMPHOROSA—What an energetic woman you are, Dominica! How youthful!

DOMINICA—[_With spiritual fervor._] There is nothing I can’t be ... for
my son. [_BEATRICE sighs._] That’s the second time you have sighed.

BEATRICE—I was thinking of my poor dear husband. How fond he was of you.

DOMINICA—I was fond of him too ... very.

BEATRICE—Symphorosa, will you go and see that everything is ready? We
hadn’t expected you so early.

DOMINICA—I didn’t telegraph the hour of my arrival because you never can
be sure when you are motoring. But I don’t mind waiting. [_Sits._] What a
joy it is to sit down again without having a landscape rushing past you!

SYMPHOROSA—Excuse me, dear, while I see that everything has been made
comfortable for you. [_She exits at right._]

BEATRICE—Will you have breakfast now?

DOMINICA—Later, thank you. We had some tea before we started. If you
please, Countess, tell Luetzen he is not to awaken my son on my account,
not before his accustomed hour. [_The COUNTESS exits at right._] I hear
you were up late last night, dissipating with Albert. He likes that.

BEATRICE—Oh ... he is so gracious ... so easy to entertain....

DOMINICA—Don’t be modest. I daresay you contrived all sorts of schemes to
amuse and entertain him.

BEATRICE—[_Bitterly._] We did our best, of course.

DOMINICA—And now, my dear, let us come to the point. I am a simple,
practical woman, you know. They haven’t nicknamed me “the cook” in Vienna
for nothing.

BEATRICE—Oh!

DOMINICA—Tut, tut! I know that’s what they call me, and I am proud of
it. But, first of all, give me a nice kiss. [_They stand up and kiss._]
That’s right! [_They sit._] And now to business. You realize why I am
here.

BEATRICE—Oh, Dominica!

DOMINICA—In a word: My son wishes to marry your daughter. [_They rise
again, kiss, and sit down. BEATRICE weeps._]

DOMINICA—Don’t cry, Beatrice. This is nothing to cry about.

BEATRICE—No, certainly not ... but I am so overwhelmed.

DOMINICA—Compose yourself, dear. Albert telegraphed me yesterday that he
didn’t trust himself to speak to you about Alexandra without me. You know
he never makes a step without me.

BEATRICE—A good, dutiful son.

DOMINICA—Yes, so he is. [_Majestically._] Happy the people who get such a
king.... But there! He asked me to come at once so that he might tell her
how enchanted he is with her. [_Both rise, embrace and kiss each other,
then sit down._]

BEATRICE—Oh, my dear Dominica!

DOMINICA—I don’t wonder. She is such a perfect creature,—beautiful, good,
clever and queenly. That is what I admire most about her—her proud,
imperious ways.

BEATRICE—How nice of you to say so!

DOMINICA—Haven’t you noticed that in the past ten years our young women
have become infected with a certain rather vulgar freedom of manner,
imported from foreign countries? Not she. She is grave, majestic, aloof,
perhaps a bit too aloof ... I mean a bit too cold toward her inferiors.

BEATRICE—Cold? Oh, I wouldn’t say that.

DOMINICA—That is precisely what I admire in her.

BEATRICE—She has altered of late. She is quite warm to her inferiors now.

DOMINICA—To think that the desire of my sainted husband is at last to be
fulfilled! This marriage, you know, was his——

BEATRICE—His most cherished wish. [_Sighs._]

DOMINICA—I am very happy, Beatrice, that the obstacles which lay in the
way of this marriage are vanished. Now Albert can follow the call of his
heart. [_She sighs deeply._]

BEATRICE—Now it’s you who sighed.

DOMINICA—I don’t deny it, Beatrice. It is no great credit to our
diplomats that my son must marry for love. It grieves me to think that
the incompetence of our diplomats should compel my son to follow the call
of his heart.

BEATRICE—Perhaps he’ll be happier for it.

DOMINICA—If we had had a Metternich, Albert might have been very unhappy,
but then there would have been a real marriage. Don’t be angry at my
candor.... One’s Family, you know!... We are not what we are—to strive
for _personal_ happiness.

BEATRICE—Alas, no.

DOMINICA—If you knew what Albert has gone through. First that Russian
girl, Olga Constantinovna....

BEATRICE—Oh, I know. And then the English girl, Patricia.

DOMINICA—You know that, too?

BEATRICE—I have followed his political career with the utmost interest.
And then, in Dresden, came Leopoldine Charlotte ... the fat one.

DOMINICA—How well you know everything! From there he went to Portugal.

BEATRICE—In the middle of July ... Silvina Gonzaga, that odious infanta.

DOMINICA—Odious? That doesn’t describe her. Perhaps there is a word for
it in Portuguese. In any case “odious” is quite inadequate. And then came
that amazing affair with Marie Hermine in Brussels.

BEATRICE—She is fully two heads taller than Albert.

DOMINICA—Yes. But we never knew it because she had always sent us bust
portraits.

BEATRICE—Yes, I know.

DOMINICA—How perfectly charming of you to _know_ everything!

BEATRICE—Oh, well, you see, I have regarded Albert as one of the family
ever since he was a child. [_HYACINTH enters at back._]

HYACINTH—Welcome, Dominica. [_Embraces her._]

DOMINICA—Karl!

HYACINTH—[_Crosses to BEATRICE, kisses her on the forehead._] Good
morning, Beatrice. You are looking splendid, Dominica.

DOMINICA—You, of all people! Are you here for a holiday?

HYACINTH—Only for a few days. But perhaps I am interrupting your——

DOMINICA—Not at all. Well, here I am, and you know why I am here.

HYACINTH—And I am delighted. [_Takes her hand; kisses it._]

DOMINICA—We were just talking of how my poor son had been tossed about by
the exigencies of politics before he arrived at last in the calm, happy
harbor of your dear family. Olga Constantinovna——

HYACINTH—Of the blue eyes. A magnificent girl.

DOMINICA—Do you know her?

HYACINTH—I danced with her mother in Munich.

DOMINICA—Odd to hear you say that.

HYACINTH—Oh, in those days——

DOMINICA—She really was a beautiful girl. But politics, you know. And
when King Edward left Marienbad that ended all hope of an alliance with
England. Whereupon the English princess began studying the Bulgarian
language. With an eye to the Bulgarian crown prince.

HYACINTH—What did Albert do?

DOMINICA—We sent him on a trip into Africa to heal his broken heart.

BEATRICE—And Patricia learned to speak Bulgarian.

DOMINICA—Fluently. But nothing came of that either. She was married in
Sweden to Prince Olaf. Now, with all her Bulgarian erudition, she lives
among the Swedes. I hear that the Bulgarian minister to Stockholm is
delirious with joy because she always speaks Bulgarian with him. And out
of that, between Sweden and Bulgaria ... came an enormous trade in pig
iron. To this day the good Bulgarians do not dream to what they owe all
that iron.

BEATRICE—And don’t you know why nothing came of the Bulgarian marriage?

DOMINICA—I understand that the Serbs thwarted Delcassé’s schemes.

BEATRICE—That is the official explanation. The real reason is more
interesting. Patricia’s family sent Arthur and the Bulgarian court sent
Philip for a final conference. As you know, Arthur can’t hear a thing
with his left ear, and Philip is totally deaf in his right ear. At the
court dinner, where the conference was to take place, they were seated
side by side, in the order that rank and etiquette demanded, so that each
had his deaf ear turned to the other. But neither of them realized it.
In the beginning each spoke a few words, but receiving no answer, became
offended and said no more. Both of them went home in a rage and that is
how Patricia came to be a Swedish princess, and why there is so much pig
iron in Bulgaria to-day.

HYACINTH—I never heard that story before. And so, Dominica, you are
taking our little girl away from us.

DOMINICA—Yes, Karl. Is she still asleep?

BEATRICE—No. She went riding early this morning.

DOMINICA—When can I see her?

BEATRICE—[_In a panic._] When can you see her?... Ah-h-h ... God! [_She
is greatly distressed; presses her hand to her forehead._] My head....
Oh! [_Sways weakly._]

HYACINTH—[_Forcibly._] My dear, I beg of you, I sincerely urge you not to
be ill; I forbid you to be ill.

DOMINICA—What’s the matter with you, dear?

BEATRICE—It started last night ... at supper ... a sudden weak spell....

HYACINTH—It was very inconsiderate of you.

BEATRICE—But Karl——

DOMINICA—If you really don’t feel well——

HYACINTH—What if she _doesn’t_ feel well? I don’t feel so well myself
just now. I forbid you to faint.... Sit down. [_With an expression of
dread, BEATRICE sits._]

DOMINICA—[_Goes to her in alarm._] But what is the matter?

HYACINTH—[_Restraining her._] I shall tell you, Dominica.

BEATRICE—[_Terrified; quavering._] Karl! Karl!

HYACINTH—Peace! Let me speak now. Dominica, you are regarded—and not
without reason—as the cleverest woman in Europe.

DOMINICA—But Karl!

HYACINTH—Now don’t be modest. You’ll be needing all your cleverness in a
moment. For we have a bit of a difficulty here. I don’t consider it so,
but Beatrice, apprehensive as usual, does.... Something has happened,
Dominica.

DOMINICA—Jesus and Mary! Not to Alexandra?

HYACINTH—There! Didn’t I say she was the cleverest woman in——

DOMINICA—Something has happened ... to Alexandra?

HYACINTH—No, but almost.

BEATRICE—[_Terrified._] Karl!

DOMINICA—Good heavens!

HYACINTH—I implore you, don’t you faint too.

DOMINICA—Karl! You terrify me.

HYACINTH—On the contrary. I am reassuring you.

DOMINICA—What happened, in heaven’s name?

HYACINTH—Simply this—that since Albert came here he has conducted himself
like a fish.

DOMINICA—Like a fish? [_DOMINICA is sitting at left, BEATRICE at right
and HYACINTH stands between them._]

BEATRICE—How can you say such a thing?

HYACINTH—It is true. He was cold and mute.

DOMINICA—Poor Albert! That was on my account. He wanted me to be here
before he——

HYACINTH—No one in the world could have suspected that. Least of all
Alexandra, who was quite attracted by him and who was deeply wounded by
his indifference.

DOMINICA—Did he make it as conspicuous as that?

HYACINTH—It couldn’t possibly have been more conspicuous. He is a very
good son, but a very bad marriage candidate. Just the same, your son is
idolized here. Both by the girl and by her good mother. [_His gesture
indicates BEATRICE._]

DOMINICA—You dear, sweet——

BEATRICE—Oh, Dominica, if you only knew ... if you only knew——

HYACINTH—And amid all this adoration he strutted like a ... like a....

DOMINICA—Fish.

HYACINTH—Worse than that! The girl didn’t sleep ... wept all night
long....

DOMINICA—How terrible!

HYACINTH—And we all suffered with her ... her mother, I, the boys, the
professor.

DOMINICA—[_Suspiciously._] What professor?

HYACINTH—[_Mopping his brow._] That’s just it. [_With a glance at
BEATRICE._] There is a teacher here, a tutor to the boys. A nice,
cultured straightforward young man. And he ... well ... toward the end
... when everyone was desperate ... an extraordinary thing occurred,
which was, indeed, only another proof of the adoration in which your son——

BEATRICE—[_Terrified; beseechingly._] Karl!

DOMINICA—Go on.

HYACINTH—With characteristic feminine logic it was deemed expedient to
invite the professor to last night’s reception ... in order to stimulate
Albert’s interest a bit. A stupid idea, of course ... but from it you can
glean the somewhat ecstatic regard in which your son is held here.

DOMINICA—What a charming, naïve idea!

HYACINTH—Wasn’t it? [_Flashes BEATRICE a triumphant glance._] Yes, and
then came something which hadn’t been reckoned with. This professor—a
fine, a serious, a most estimable young man—it appeared that he—think of
it—that he had been secretly in love with Alexandra. [_In terror BEATRICE
rises. There is a brief pause._]

DOMINICA—[_Emphatically._] Such things happen. [_Reassured, BEATRICE sits
down._]

HYACINTH—[_With a triumphant glance at BEATRICE._] Yes, and no wonder. He
sees her every day. She is beautiful. The rest was inevitable. Think of
all those ancient romances of the Tutor and the Princess——

DOMINICA—What then?

HYACINTH—Put yourself in this poor young man’s place. Though desperately
in love, he lends himself to this innocent deception, knowing, poor
fellow, that he is only a means to an end.

DOMINICA—It was all Albert’s fault. Why did he hesitate to speak? I
consider his reticence exaggerated under the circumstances.

HYACINTH—Remember it was out of consideration for you. Really, Albert’s
devotion to you borders on the fantastic.

DOMINICA—After all, it _is_ gratifying. [_With tears in her eyes._] Well,
and then?

HYACINTH—[_Mopping his brow._] Well, as I said, this young man sat down
to supper with me ... this martyr ... I really must call him that ...
this wretched human sacrifice ... and there at the table he endured such
tortures that tears came to my eyes, watching him.

DOMINICA—I don’t wonder. It is really quite touching.

HYACINTH—And the poor girl, who is tender-hearted as she can be, could
not bear to see him suffer so ... and she would have sent him away ...
but the professor ... solely for the sake of the family ... solely for
Alexandra’s sake ... solely for the sake of your son’s happiness ... the
professor played the comedy through, though his heart was bleeding....

DOMINICA—Poor fellow....

HYACINTH— ... Until Albert, who knew nothing of all this, insulted him.

DOMINICA—[_Horrified._] The professor?

HYACINTH—Yes, him.

DOMINICA—This poor young man?

HYACINTH—This poor young man. Think of it!

DOMINICA—What did Albert do?

HYACINTH—He called him an impertinent little upstart.

DOMINICA—Terrible! And didn’t you interfere?

HYACINTH—How could I?

DOMINICA—What did the young man do?

HYACINTH—What could he do? He bowed his head. I thought my heart would
break.

DOMINICA—Poor, brave fellow! And what did Alexandra say?

HYACINTH—[_Mopping his brow._] I am glad that you, too, are sorry for
this nice young man.

DOMINICA—What did Alexandra do?

HYACINTH—You are not only clever but sympathetic as well.

DOMINICA—And Alexandra?

HYACINTH—If you could only have seen him standing there, this poor,
industrious scientist.... Would you believe it? An astronomer! With his
hopeless, despairing, inarticulate love; with his shattered romance; with
his bleeding heart ... and Albert insulting him with cold, withering
elegance.... And there he stood with bowed head ... disgraced irreparably
... annihilated ... after he had made such a sacrifice for the family....
Can you picture it? Such loyalty—and such a martyrdom? _You_ tell me, as
a woman, is such a young man not noble?

DOMINICA—[_Emphatically._] Most noble!

HYACINTH—[_Rhetorically._] Is he the sort of young man who should be
driven out? Is he the sort who should be despised?

DOMINICA—Certainly not.

HYACINTH—[_With increasing fervor._] Is he the sort who should be
insulted? Who should be mistreated? Who should be punished?

DOMINICA—God forbid.

HYACINTH—[_Still more impassioned._] Again I ask you: Does such a young
man deserve to be driven away? To be insulted? To be mistreated? Or does
he deserve ... to ... what shall I say? ... to ... I don’t know myself
... he deserves ... to ... to——

DOMINICA—To be kissed!

HYACINTH—Yes, that is just what happened to him. [_Sinks weakly into a
chair; mops his brow; murmurs to himself._] I thought she’d never say it.

DOMINICA—[_Taken aback._] Eh?... What happened to him?

HYACINTH—Just what you said. Alexandra kissed him.

DOMINICA—Alexandra?

HYACINTH—As you said.

DOMINICA—I? Yes. Um, yes.

HYACINTH—After Albert insulted him she couldn’t stand by and see him
suffer any longer. She kissed him, in mine and Albert’s presence.

DOMINICA—And what did Albert do?

HYACINTH—How could he, poor chap, understand what was going on?
Naturally, he didn’t see it all as clearly as you see it now.

DOMINICA—[_Without conviction._] I? Yes ... yes ... of course.

HYACINTH—And Beatrice ... who is such a stickler for form ... sits here
worrying herself almost to death [_turns to BEATRICE_] about something
which Dominica, as you see, finds perfectly natural, yes, almost
inevitable. Isn’t it so?

DOMINICA—[_Without conviction._] Certainly, certainly.

HYACINTH—It was a charming gesture on Alexandra’s part. I am truly proud
that throughout the entire episode she conducted herself just as you
yourself would have done. We may all be proud of her. [_As he speaks
BEATRICE gives him furtive, grateful glances._]

DOMINICA—A splendid girl. A girl of spirit! [_Majestically._] Happy the
people who get such a queen.

HYACINTH— ... And if you want to know—I kissed the poor fellow myself.

DOMINICA—You were right. Louis XVI., after his wife’s recovery from a
dangerous confinement, kissed a nurse. [_Emphatically._] Such things
happen. [_After a brief pause._] So that was the terrible thing?

HYACINTH—Yes, that was it. [_Points to BEATRICE._] She fainted dead away.
But she ... she was angry with the professor anyhow.

BEATRICE—[_Quite reassured now._] I? I look upon it in the same light as
Dominica does. Only I wasn’t sure she would see it the way I did.

HYACINTH—She is angry with the tutor on account of Napoleon. He teaches
the boys that——

DOMINICA—Can’t you bear him, either, this Napoleon?

HYACINTH—She loathes him!

DOMINICA—Dear, in my sainted husband’s library there is a curiosity,—a
little French book which proves quite conclusively that Napoleon never
lived. I’ll send it to you. Read it. It is most comforting.... There ...
dearest.... So that was your tragic difficulty.

BEATRICE—Yes, you clever, practical darling.

DOMINICA—Poor little tutor! Now he is beginning to interest me. What is
to become of him?

BEATRICE—He is packing. Oh, he feels that, after what has happened, he
cannot stay on here another moment.

DOMINICA—He is quite right. But are you letting him go like that?

BEATRICE—Well, you see, my dear ... he is now ... the poor fellow is now
like an exploded cartridge.

DOMINICA—One must be very careful with cartridges. It is just such
people who become writers of memoirs, American lecturers or publicists
for the opposition party. One cannot be too careful. I have had painful
experiences in such matters. Tutors, adjutants.... I shall speak to him
myself.

BEATRICE—Thank you, you clever darling.

DOMINICA—Had I been here I should have warned you in the first place
not to trifle with a tutor. A tutor near a princess is as dangerous as
a lighted match near a tin of gasoline. And, in any case, there was no
need for all this haste. Had you waited one day more ... then I’d have
been here. There is an old English proverb which says: “Act in haste and
repent at your leisure.”

HYACINTH—[_Significantly._] In England!

DOMINICA—Now then ... when can I see this tutor? [_The CHAMBERMAID enters
at right._]

BEATRICE—At once. Is everything ready?

CHAMBERMAID—Yes, your highness.

BEATRICE—Send Cæsar to me here. [_The COUNTESS and SYMPHOROSA enter at
right._]

SYMPHOROSA—Everything is ready now, Dominica, dear; and there is a
surprise for you in there.

DOMINICA—Nothing will surprise me now, dear Symphorosa.

SYMPHOROSA—This will, I think. Albert is awaiting you in the drawing room.

DOMINICA—Albert? Up this early? On _my_ account! You are right, dear.
This is a most joyful surprise. I’m coming. [_As she goes._] Meantime,
bring this professor to me here.

BEATRICE—I shall arrange it at once. But I am afraid you will find him
difficult.

HYACINTH—And I’ll wager that you won’t find him difficult at all.

DOMINICA—Karl, I haven’t wagered since 1886, when I bet my sainted
husband that I would give birth to a boy.

HYACINTH—And it was a girl?

DOMINICA—Two, Karl, two at a time. Come, Countess. [_She exits at right.
SYMPHOROSA and the COUNTESS follow her. HYACINTH and BEATRICE look at
each other in silence. He smiles triumphantly._]

BEATRICE—You have a good heart, Karl, and a good head. [_Kisses him on
the brow._] There is but one thing I am still afraid of——

HYACINTH—In heaven’s name, what now?

BEATRICE—When she speaks to her son in there ... won’t he have a
different opinion about it all?

HYACINTH—There are two reasons why he won’t have a different opinion. In
the first place, he won’t be such a fool as to disagree with his mamma;
and in the second place, I mean to be present at the interview. [_Starts
to go._]

BEATRICE—[_Hurries after him._] Karl, dear ... wait.... I have been very
unfair to you.... What can I do to make you forgive me?

HYACINTH—[_At the door, right._] All I ask of you is never to fall on
my neck again. To-morrow you will write those words in a copy book one
hundred times: “Old brooms sometimes sweep clean.” [_He exits._]

BEATRICE—No manners at all. [_CÆSAR enters at back._]

BEATRICE—Cæsar! You will go downstairs and ask Dr. Agi if he will be
good enough to come up at once and wait in this room. Her highness, the
Princess Dominica wishes to speak to him.

CÆSAR—Very good, your highness.

BEATRICE—What are you serving her highness for breakfast?

CÆSAR—Tea, cold salmon, cold beef, cold chicken ... cold....

BEATRICE—Cæsar! Why, that is last night’s supper....

CÆSAR—I beg pardon, your highness. It is this morning’s breakfast. I had
it put on the table at one this morning, and no one has eaten a bite of
it yet.

BEATRICE—Have you lost your senses, Cæsar?

CÆSAR—Quite likely, your highness.... Another breakfast will be served.

BEATRICE—Why are you so pale?

CÆSAR—I didn’t sleep well, your highness. I suffered agonies. Mostly on
account of the tea.

BEATRICE—On account of what tea?

CÆSAR—On account of the terrible mistake. Father Hyacinth was served the
hot tea and your highness got the cold consommé.

BEATRICE—I am glad I did. I would have fainted away in that horrible
moment if I hadn’t had that sip of ice-cold soup. It revived me.

CÆSAR—Thank you, your highness. You have taken a great load off my mind.

BEATRICE—You are not to punish the man who made the mistake.

CÆSAR—No, your highness. Perhaps you would wish me to give him a little
reward?

BEATRICE—Let us not go to extremes.... The professor is to wait here.
[_She exits at right. CÆSAR goes to the door at left, but it opens and
ALEXANDRA enters._]

ALEXANDRA—Has the princess arrived?

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Where is she?

CÆSAR—In there, your highness. [_Points to right._] I believe she is
changing her clothes after her long motor ride.

ALEXANDRA—And what are you doing here?

CÆSAR—I have been told to summon—— [_Stops._]

ALEXANDRA—To summon whom?

CÆSAR—[_Reluctantly._] Professor Agi.

ALEXANDRA—[_Sharply._] What do they want of Professor Agi?

CÆSAR—He is to come up here and wait.

ALEXANDRA—Very good. Send him up. [_She sits._]

CÆSAR—But ... if your highness pleases ... I am to send Mr. Agi up here
to wait for——

ALEXANDRA—_Professor_ Agi.

CÆSAR—Professor Agi up here to wait for her highness, who wishes to speak
with him.

ALEXANDRA—Just do as you were told. Send Professor Agi up.

CÆSAR—Yes, your highness. [_He exits at back. After a brief pause AGI
enters, dressed for travelling._]

AGI—Your highness sent for me?

ALEXANDRA—No. But I waited here because I learned that you had been sent
for.

AGI—Is there anything your highness wanted?

ALEXANDRA—What sort of costume is that you are wearing?

AGI—A travelling costume.

ALEXANDRA—You are going away?

AGI—Yes. [_There is a pause._] Is there anything your highness wanted?

ALEXANDRA—And what is to become of the boys?

AGI—I don’t know.

ALEXANDRA—Aren’t you sorry to leave them?

AGI—Indeed.... I am very sorry. [_A pause._] Is there anything your
highness wanted?

ALEXANDRA—Princess Maria Dominica, the mother of the Crown Prince, has
come.

AGI—I know.

ALEXANDRA—And do you know why she has come?

AGI—I know that, too.

ALEXANDRA—Well? [_A pause._] Sit down, please.

AGI—Thank you. [_He does not sit._]

ALEXANDRA—[_She rises._] I haven’t spoken with the Princess yet. I
haven’t even seen her yet. Perhaps within the next few minutes we shall
meet. And then ... she will tell me why she has come.

AGI—Yes. [_There is a pause._]

ALEXANDRA—Is that all you have to say about it?

AGI—Practically.

ALEXANDRA—I don’t understand this mocking tone!

AGI—Not mocking, only incredulous. I am not a boy any more, to believe in
fairy tales.

ALEXANDRA—[_With significance._] ... Boy?

AGI—Yes, your highness, not a boy.

ALEXANDRA—[_Regarding him sternly, reproachfully._] What _is_ this
attitude you have assumed toward me?

AGI—One of utmost deference, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Why this pretense? Have you forgotten what happened last night?

AGI—I have forgotten, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Have you? And have you also forgotten what I——

AGI—I have forgotten that, too, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—Was it so easy to forget?

AGI—I didn’t say that.

ALEXANDRA—If I had known——

AGI—You must have known.

ALEXANDRA—That you would forget?

AGI—I ... must forget, and your highness must deny it ... and ... _he_
must not remember it.

ALEXANDRA—He shall remember it, and I don’t deny it. But I see that what
I gave you was too precious. More precious than you deserve. Perhaps ...
a kingdom.

AGI—That is not so precious. I know of one that was offered in exchange
for a horse.

ALEXANDRA—You even insult me! You speak like a sullen child.

AGI—No, your highness ... what I am saying, what I am doing, my departure
to-day ... these are my answer to your highness’ kiss.

ALEXANDRA—I hadn’t expected you to utter that word.

AGI—Uttering it doesn’t hurt. The kiss itself was much more painful.

ALEXANDRA—[_Cuttingly._] More painful for you than for me?

AGI—Oh, yes. It made me feel your profound pity for me, and also your
utter contempt. It was a supercilious thing to do. It implied that I was
not a human being at all ... that I could be treated ... like a child or
a pet animal.

ALEXANDRA—Is that the way you took it?

AGI—If I hadn’t taken it like that——

ALEXANDRA—Then what?

AGI—Then I should be kissing you still.

ALEXANDRA—[_Resentfully._] I see it was all a stupid mistake on my part.

AGI—It was too much, your highness ... too much at a time. That is why it
was unconvincing.

ALEXANDRA—Unconvincing?

AGI—Yes. For we hadn’t reached that stage ... and yet ... suddenly you
had kissed me.... Afterwards ... I went out into the garden ... and
wandered about ... for a long time ... not among the roses ... but out
under the oaks where the morning breeze was unscented and cool.... There
... at daybreak ... I grew calmer ... and could weigh and consider....
And I felt like a beggar into whose hat someone had tossed a thousand
crown note instead of a copper ... and who must, in all honesty, run
after the giver and offer it back.

ALEXANDRA—I am glad to see that you know your place so well.

AGI—It is morning, your highness. The sun is shining.

ALEXANDRA—And not the stars.

AGI—No, no; not the stars.

ALEXANDRA—[_Nervously._] I am very glad of it.

AGI—And I. Because you are glad.

ALEXANDRA—I am very glad of it. It is better like this.

AGI—We can’t make it better. [_There is a brief pause. HYACINTH enters at
right. AGI bows._]

HYACINTH—Well, my son, at last you are here. The Princess wants to talk
to you. Yes, and the Crown Prince, too.

AGI—The Crown Prince?

HYACINTH—He would like to make amends for ... that unfortunate
misunderstanding of yesterday.

AGI—Forgive me, father ... but I must ask them to excuse me. I am
leaving. My box is already on the wagon.

HYACINTH—And you proposed to leave us without farewells?

AGI—I have just said good-bye to her highness.

ALEXANDRA—Yes, and in a most extraordinary way.

HYACINTH—How?

ALEXANDRA—Coldly. Sullenly. As if I had insulted him.

HYACINTH—Well, isn’t that interesting? This is the second time he has
divined my thoughts. Yes, you did insult him, my child. Certainly you
hurt his vanity ... perhaps also his self-respect ... with that kindly
little kiss. That is what you mean—isn’t it, my son?

AGI—Yes, father.

ALEXANDRA—A tragic moment like that ... and you call it a kindly little
kiss!

HYACINTH—[_To AGI._] You have your athletic habits to thank for this
wisdom, this healthy clarity of judgment.

ALEXANDRA—And the things he said yesterday ... about his life and his
death and his immortality.... Were they all untrue?

HYACINTH—Don’t you see? Sudden anguish seeks expression in the strongest
language. That is why common people, for instance, become profane in such
moments.

ALEXANDRA—Is that all it meant?

HYACINTH—All? That is a great deal, my daughter, for it manifests a
profound sorrow. An exclamation of pain, as it were, in which the words
are not important.

ALEXANDRA—Which of his words shall I believe then?

HYACINTH—The ones he leaves unspoken now. [_A brief pause._] Well, and
you, my daughter? Now! Be candid.

ALEXANDRA—I, Hyacinth?... If I am to be candid, I believe I love him a
little. [_Puts her head on his shoulder._]

HYACINTH—I myself thought you loved him ... until you kissed him.

ALEXANDRA—You say that, too? I don’t understand any of you. Is there
anything the matter with me?

HYACINTH—No, my child.

ALEXANDRA—And you don’t believe it was love either?

AGI—No, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—But I——

HYACINTH—You don’t understand yourself, my child. It was pity that
stirred in you last night. And at half past two it expressed itself in
that bitter kiss.

ALEXANDRA—Bitter?

HYACINTH—It wasn’t me you kissed, and yet I know it was bitter.

ALEXANDRA—I am very unhappy, Hyacinth. But when you talk to me like this
... if you would only stay on a day or two longer and keep talking to me
like this ... then I should feel better.

HYACINTH—I’ll stay, my child. I’ll stay three days more to keep you
cheerful; I’ll stay four days——

AGI—Permit me to take my leave. [_Bows._] Your highness. [_Nervously
takes leave of HYACINTH._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Cannot bring herself to let him go like this._] I admire your
calm. Your mastery of yourself. Yet I know you are only pretending. This
isn’t what you’d like to do. [_She obstructs AGI’S way._]

AGI—Perhaps not, your highness.

ALEXANDRA—That isn’t what you’d like to say.

AGI—Perhaps not.

ALEXANDRA—But ... if you can control yourself so perfectly now, why
didn’t you last night? [_Angrily._] That’s what I want to know.

HYACINTH—I’ll stay a week.

ALEXANDRA—[_More and more hysterically._] If you can be so calm now, why
weren’t you calm then? Why did you do what you did? Why? Why? What did
you want?

AGI—I don’t know. That is the strangest part of what happened last night.
I didn’t quite know what I wanted.

ALEXANDRA—You didn’t know?

AGI—No.

ALEXANDRA—You didn’t know, and yet——

HYACINTH—My child ... be calm ... I’ll stay a fortnight.

ALEXANDRA—[_With growing indignation, unheeding him._] He didn’t know
what he wanted ... yet he dragged me along with him ... appealed to my
sympathy ... my credulity ... dragged me and I clung to him ... ready for
anything ... even my own destruction ... even if the whole world crumbled
to pieces ... I would have clung to him ... and ... he ... he—— [_ALBERT
enters quietly. She sees him but continues as if he were not there._] He
didn’t know what he wanted ... and didn’t care what harm he did ... as
long as he could gratify a momentary impulse ... he——

ALBERT—[_With mild irony._] Xara, you misjudge him. He is a free spirit.
He is not like us.

ALEXANDRA—[_Unheeding him._] He only wanted to destroy everything ... to
make a scandal.... Yes, he _was_ ill-mannered and ignorant——

ALBERT—You are unjust. He is an astronomer.

ALEXANDRA—And now _I_ say his conduct was impertinent.

AGI—Your highness!

ALBERT—Don’t answer her, Hans! I forbid it, Hans! And if you will permit
me ... Hans ... I will kiss you, Hans. [_Embraces him and kisses him on
the cheek._]

HYACINTH—Bravo! I leave to-morrow.

AGI—[_Good-humoredly._] Thanks, your highness. You overwhelm me.

ALBERT—Do you mind?

AGI—Not this one.

ALBERT—Shall I kiss you again?

AGI—Thanks, your kindness, that would be too much. One was just enough.
[_GEORG and ARSEN enter at back. Each carries a bouquet of flowers in his
hand. They pause a moment on the threshold, then come down to center,
where they stand embarrassed. ALBERT goes down left._]

GEORG—Professor—— [_He is too touched to speak; gives AGI the flowers. So
does ARSEN._]

AGI—For me? [_Takes them._]

GEORG—Yes. [_Turns away; wipes the tears from his eyes. ARSEN hides his
face against GEORG’S shoulder._]

AGI—There, now! Can these be—the Indians? The celebrated Indians? [_GEORG
and ARSEN turn and embrace him affectionately._] We must have a happy
leavetaking. Not like this. Why, you ought to be delighted. From now
on—no more history lessons. Now comes history itself. [_He bows, and
exits at back with the boys. There is a pause._]

ALBERT—Don’t be angry, Xara. I owed him that.

ALEXANDRA—Him?

ALBERT—In consolation for that kiss you gave him yesterday. [_ALEXANDRA
looks suspiciously at HYACINTH._]

HYACINTH—Yes ... yes. It is true.

ALEXANDRA—Well, then ... I was not to blame?

HYACINTH—No, my child.

ALEXANDRA—And I didn’t make an irreparable blunder?

HYACINTH—That is almost impossible for one in your social position.

ALEXANDRA—[_Mournfully._] And I wasn’t a heroine?

HYACINTH—No, my child.

ALEXANDRA—What was I then?

HYACINTH—Don’t ask, my child. [_There is a brief pause._]

ALBERT—[_With ceremonious elegance._] Alexandra ... last night you made
handsome amends for a blunder of mine. I ask you now to stay at my side
through life. And when I am at fault be always as ... as ... courageous
as you were then. Will you? [_Extends his hand to her._]

ALEXANDRA—[_Gives him her hand. There is a brief silence._] Albert ... it
is my duty to be quite candid. If I tell you honestly that at this moment
I feel no other sentiment toward you than respect ... and friendship——

ALBERT—Then I answer you, Xara, that it suffices me now.

ALEXANDRA—[_Wistfully but kindly._] We haven’t contrived a love match,
have we?

ALBERT—No. No. Decidedly not. [_With each “no” he shakes her hand._]

ALEXANDRA—No.

HYACINTH—No.

ALBERT—May I say what we have contrived instead?

ALEXANDRA—Yes.

ALBERT—We have contrived ... something more beautiful.... Love that comes
after marriage. The deeper and stronger happiness that ... that——

HYACINTH—That comes later and endures longer.

ALBERT—Extraordinary that you can always express one’s innermost thoughts
so neatly. Think of this: Katherine of Württemberg was the happiest wife
in the world. And yet hers was one of those compulsory marriages which
Napoleon—— [_Looks around_] Napole.... But happy, you see, nevertheless.

ALEXANDRA—[_Sighs._] Nevertheless. [_There it a pause. DOMINICA enters._]

DOMINICA—My dear Alexandra. [_Embraces her._]

ALEXANDRA—Welcome, Aunt Dominica. [_Kisses her hand with profound
reverence._]

DOMINICA—Tell me, my dears, hasn’t the professor come yet?

HYACINTH—Oh, yes; he was here.

DOMINICA—Well?

HYACINTH—And he has gone away. [_A long silence._]

DOMINICA—What does this silence mean? Why don’t you speak? [_Another
silence during which BEATRICE enters._]

BEATRICE—[_Regards the silent group; terror seizes her; she cries out._]
Merciful heaven! Has something happened again?

HYACINTH—The professor was kissed.

BEATRICE—[_In alarm._] By whom?

HYACINTH—By Albert.

BEATRICE—[_With a sigh of relief._] Oh!

DOMINICA—What does this mean? One after another, you are all kissing this
person. What sort of man is he?

HYACINTH—A most admirable man.

BEATRICE—Did you kiss him, too?

HYACINTH—Yesterday. But I shall kiss him again before he goes away.

DOMINICA—There appears to be no further need for me to talk to him. The
young man has had his reward.

ALBERT—It seems to me, mother, that a man who had performed such a great
service for the family deserved it. Not only from the bride but also from
the bridegroom. [_DOMINICA nods assent._]

HYACINTH—Especially from the bridegroom.

DOMINICA—Quite right.

BEATRICE—If he hasn’t gone yet ... perhaps I ought to kiss him too ...
what?

DOMINICA—I fancy he has had enough. But I shall kiss ... your daughter.

ALEXANDRA—Dear Aunt ... if you deem me worthy....

DOMINICA—Entirely, my dear daughter, with only this suggestion: That you
remember now and again that your sainted father used to call you his
swan. Think often of what it means to be a swan ... gliding proudly ...
majestically ... where the moon gleams on the mirror of the water ...
gliding always in that purple radiance ... and never coming ashore. For
when a swan walks, my daughter ... when she waddles up the bank ... then
she painfully resembles another bird.

ALEXANDRA—[_Softly ironical at her own expense._] A goose?

DOMINICA—Almost, my girl. Natural history teaches that the swan is
nothing but an aristocratic duck. That is why she must stay on the mirror
of the water. She is a bird, but she may never fly. She knows a song, but
she may never sing until she is about to die. Yes, dear, glide on the
water ... head high ... stately silence ... and the song—never! [_There
is a pause._]

CÆSAR—[_Entering at right._] Breakfast is served. [_HYACINTH proffers
DOMINICA his arm. Next goes BEATRICE alone. Then ALBERT and ALEXANDRA arm
in arm. They exit. CÆSAR strides majestically after them as_]

THE CURTAIN FALLS





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FASHIONS FOR MEN, AND THE SWAN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


