The Project Gutenberg eBook of Hossfeld's Spanish Dialogues, and Idiomatic Phrases Indispensible for a Rapid Acquisition of the Spanish Language
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Hossfeld's Spanish Dialogues, and Idiomatic Phrases Indispensible for a Rapid Acquisition of the Spanish Language

Author: W. N. Cornett
        C. Hossfeld

Release date: January 25, 2013 [eBook #41915]
                Most recently updated: November 27, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOSSFELD'S SPANISH DIALOGUES, AND IDIOMATIC PHRASES INDISPENSIBLE FOR A RAPID ACQUISITION OF THE SPANISH LANGUAGE ***




Produced by Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net







 Every attempt has been made to replicate the original book as printed.
             Some typographical errors have been corrected.
                      (A list follows the e-text.)
No attempt has been made to modernize the printed accentuation of the Spanish words.
                       (etext transcriber's note)




_The Publishers call attention to the following Works for the study of
the Spanish Language_:-

English-Spanish Grammar, by Hossfeld's New Method, arranged for Classes,
Schools, and Private Lessons.

Conjugation of Spanish Verbs.

English-Spanish Commercial Correspondent.

Spanish-English and English-Spanish Dictionary (new Edition).

Hossfeld's Spanish Reader.

Spanish Commercial Correspondence and Technicalities, by Cornett.

Modern Spanish Reader, by O'Doherty.

Spanish-English and English-Spanish Idiom and Phrase Book, by Macdonald.

Spanish Composition, by Macdonald.

Spanish Composition and Idioms, by Yañez.

English and Spanish Vocabulary.

Engineering Translations in English and Spanish, by Standring.

Dictionary of Engineering Terms in English and Spanish, by García and
Cornett.

Spanish Technological Dictionary, by Ponce de León--Vol. 1.
English-Spanish. Vol. 2. Spanish-English.

Handbook of Commercial Spanish, by Thomas.




                       HOSSFELD'S POCKET MANUALS.

HOSSFELD'S SPANISH DIALOGUES, AND IDIOMATIC PHRASES INDISPENSABLE FOR A
              RAPID ACQUISITION OF THE =SPANISH LANGUAGE=

              _New Edition, Entirely Revised and Enlarged_

                                   BY

                             W. N. CORNETT

  LONDON HIRSCHFELD BROTHERS, LIMITED 263, High Holborn, W.C. 40 & 42,
 University Avenue, Glasgow 133, North Thirteenth Street, Philadelphia
                                  1915

                              _Copyright._

                         _All rights reserved._




PREFACE.


The aid of a reliable book of dialogues in the study of a language
cannot be overestimated, and it is with a view to further increasing the
usefulness in this respect of the present work that it has been
thoroughly revised, and a number of important changes made in it. The
pages on Spanish pronunciation have been re-written and augmented, as
have also those on the verbs, and numerous additions have been made to
the vocabularies, several of which have also been rearranged. As in the
new editions of the French and other dialogues of the series, idioms and
proverbs, alphabetically arranged, have been substituted for less useful
matter, and some aids are given to letter-writing, but for a full
treatment of this latter subject those interested are referred to
special works dealing with it issued by the same publishers.

The above changes, together with others of a minor character, but which
bring the work right up to date, will, it is felt, be appreciated by all
desirous of acquiring a good conversational knowledge of the Spanish
language.

Wallasey.

W. N. CORNETT.




  CONTENTS.                           INDICE.

                              _Page_                               _Página_
                                    |
  Chapter on Pronunciation      xii | Sobre la Pronunciación           xii
                                    |
  PART I.                           | PRIMERA PARTE.
                                    |
  _Words of Frequent Occurrence._   | _Palabras de Uso Frecuente._
                                    |
  The Days of the Week            1 | Los Días de la Semana              1
                                    |
  The Months                      2 | Los Meses                          2
                                    |
  Division of Time                2 | División del Tiempo                2
                                    |
  Seasons and Special Days        4 | Las Estaciones y Días de Fiesta    4
                                    |
  Man and Relationship            4 | El Hombre y el Parentesco          4
                                    |
  The State, Dignities, etc.      7 | El Estado, Dignidades, etc.        7
                                    |
  The Army                       10 | El Ejército                       10
                                    |
  The Navy                       12 | La Marina                         12
                                    |
  Religion                       14 | La Religión                       14
                                    |
  Arts and Sciences              16 | Artes y Ciencias                  16
                                    |
  Commerce                       20 | Comercio                          20
                                    |
  Money                          24 | Monedas                           24
                                    |
  Professions and Trades         25 | Profesiones y Oficios             25
                                    |
  Sports, Pastimes, etc.         29 | Deportes, Pasatiempos, etc.       29
                                    |
  Railways                       30 | Ferrocarriles                     30
                                    |
  A Steamship                    32 | Un Vapor                          32
                                    |
  A journey                      33 | Un Viaje                          33
                                    |
  The Office                     34 | La Oficina                        34
                                    |
  Parts of the Body              35 | Partes del Cuerpo                 35
                                    |
  Ailments, Remedies, etc.       38 | Enfermedades, Remedios, etc.      38
                                    |
  The Senses and Actions         42 | Los Sentidos y las Acciones       42
                                    |
  Dress                          45 | Vestido                           45
                                    |
  Meals                          47 | Comidas                           47
                                    |
  Eatables and Drinks            47 | Comestibles y Bebidas             47
                                    |
  In the Street. Buildings       52 | En la Calle. Edificios            52
                                    |
  Public Notices                 55 | Avisos al Público                 55
                                    |
  Parts of a House               56 | Partes de una Casa                56
                                    |
  Furniture and Utensils         58 | Muebles y Utensilios              58
                                    |
  Table Utensils                 60 | Servicio de Mesa                  60
                                    |
  Domestic Animals               61 | Animales Domésticos               61
                                    |
  Wild Animals                   62 | Animales Silvestres               62
                                    |
  Birds                          63 | Aves                              63
                                    |
  Fishes                         65 | Peces                             65
                                    |
  Insects and Reptiles           67 | Insectos y Reptiles               67
                                    |
  Flowers                        68 | Flores                            68
                                    |
  Fruits, Trees, Vegetables,        | Frutas, Arboles, Legumbres,
  etc.                           69 | etc.                              69
                                    |
  Metals and Minerals            74 | Metales y Minerales               74
                                    |
  Tools, Machinery, etc.         76 | Herramientas, Maquinaria,
                                    | etc.                              76
                                    |
  Cardinal Numbers               78 | Números Cardinales                78
                                    |
  Ordinal Numbers                80 | Números Ordinales                 80
                                    |
  Fractions                      81 | Fracciones                        81
                                    |
  Multiples and Collectives      82 | Multíplices y Colectivos          82
                                    |
  The Earth                      83 | La Tierra                         83
                                    |
  The Sky and Air                85 | El Cielo y el Aire                85
                                    |
  Countries and Nations          87 | Países y Pueblos                  87
                                    |
  Islands and Towns              96 | Islas y Ciudades                  96
                                    |
  Seas, Rivers and Mountains    101 | Mares, Ríos y Montañas           101
                                    |
  Christian Names               102 | Nombres de Pila                  102
                                    |
  Adjectives in Common use      109 | Adjetivos de Uso Corriente       109
                                    |
  Verbs. Conjugation of             | Verbos. Conjugación de
    the Auxiliary Verbs         127 |    los Verbos Auxiliares         127
                                    |
  The three Regular                 | Las tres Conjugaciones
    Conjugations                138 |    Regulares                     138
                                    |
  The Principal Irregular           | Los Verbos Irregulares
    Verbs                       141 |    Principales                   141
                                    |
  Verbs with their Past             | Verbos con sus Participios
    Participles                 158 |    Pasivos                       158
                                    |
                                    |
       PART II.                     |        SEGUNDA PARTE.
                                    |
    _Useful Phrases._               |       _Frases Utiles._
                                    |
  Titles                        167 | Títulos                          167
                                    |
  Asking Questions              167 | Hacer Preguntas                  167
                                    |
  Thanks                        172 | Gracias                          172
                                    |
  Asking the Way in                 | Preguntar por el Camino
    Town. In the Street         172 |    en una Ciudad. En la Calle    172
                                    |
  Conveyances                   175 | Vehículos                        175
                                    |
  Making Enquiries about            | Informarse de Alguien            177
    Someone                     177 |
                                    |
  Enquiries concerning              | Preguntas acerca de un
    a Journey                   179 |   Viaje                          179
      By Road                   179 |     En Diligencia                179
      Rail                      182 |     Por Ferrocarril              182
      Sea                       185 |     Por Mar                      185
      Motor                     186 |     En Automóvil                 186
                                    |
  The Custom House              187 | La Aduana                        187
                                    |
  Getting up                    188 | Levantarse                       188
                                    |
  The Bath                      190 | El Baño                          190
                                    |
  Dressing                      191 | Vestirse                         191
                                    |
  Breakfast                     192 | El Desayuno. El Almuerzo         192
                                    |
  Lunch or Dinner               195 | El Almuerzo o la Comida          195
                                    |
  At a Restaurant               201 | En un Restaurante                201
                                    |
  The Café                      203 | El Café                          203
                                    |
  Tea                           204 | El Té                            204
                                    |
  Supper                        205 | La Cena                          205
                                    |
  Evening                       207 | La Tarde                         207
                                    |
  Going to Bed                  208 | Acostarse                        208
                                    |
  A Meeting                     212 | Un Encuentro                     212
                                    |
  Salutations                   212 | Saludos                          212
                                    |
  A Visit                       218 | Una Visita                       218
                                    |
  Departure                     222 | Despedirse                       222
                                    |
  Going and Coming              224 | Ir y Venir                       224
                                    |
  Exigencies of Life            229 | Exigencias de la Vida            229
                                    |
  The Fire                      231 | El Fuego                         231
                                    |
  Marketing                     233 | Compras                          233
                                    |
  The Walk                      236 | El Paseo                         236
                                    |
  In the Garden                 242 | En el Jardín                     242
                                    |
  To write a Letter             247 | Escribir una Carta               247
                                    |
  The Post Office               249 | El Correo                        249
                                    |
  With a Tailor                 252 | Con un Sastre                    252
   " Dressmaker                 256 | Con una Modista                  256
                                    |
  At a Hairdresser's or Barber's259 | En una Peluquería o Barbería     259
   " Shoemaker's                261 |  " Zapatería                     261
   " Woollen-draper's           262 |  " Pañería                       262
   " Linen-draper's             264 |  " Lencería                      264
   " Perfumer's                 266 |  " Perfumería                    266
   " Bookseller's               268 |  " Librería                      268
   " Jeweller's                 274 |  " Joyería                       274
   " Watchmaker's               276 |  " Relojería                     276
   " Picture Gallery            280 |  " Galería de Pinturas           280
                                    |
  Chess                         284 | Ajedrez                          284
                                    |
  On the Spanish Language       286 | Sobre La Lengua Española         286
                                    |
  Hiring Apartments             290 | Alquilar Cuartos                 290
                                    |
  Engaging a Man-servant        292 | Ajustar un Criado                292
   " a Maid-servant             295 |  " una Criada                    295
                                    |
  At the Hotel                  297 | En el Hotel                      297
                                    |
  The Money-changer             300 | El Cambista                      300
                                    |
  The Theatre                   301 | El Teatro                        301
                                    |
  The Seasons                   303 | Las Estaciones                   303
                                    |
  The Weather                   306 | El Tiempo                        306
                                    |
  Periods of Time               313 | Períodos de Tiempo               313
                                    |
  Time and Dates                316 | Horas y Fechas                   316
                                    |
  News                          321 | Noticias                         321
                                    |
  Age                           324 | Edad                             324
                                    |
  Asking and Giving Advice      326 | Pedir y Dar Consejo              326
                                    |
  Affirming and Denying         329 | Afirmar y Negar                  329
                                    |
  Expressions of Surprise       332 | Expresiones de Sorpresa          332
    " Probability               334 |   " Probabilidad                 334
    " Sorrow                    336 |   " Sentimiento                  336
    " Joy                       337 |   " Alegría                      337
    " Blame                     337 |   " Censura                      337
    " Anger                     338 |   " Cólera                       338
    " Antipathy and Aversion    340 |   " Antipatía y Aversión         340
    " Sympathy and Friendship   342 |   " Simpatía y Amistad           342
                                    |
  Correspondence                344 | Correspondencia                  344
                                    |
  To begin a Letter             344 | Principiar una Carta             344
                                    |
  To end a Letter               346 | Concluir una Carta               346
                                    |
  English and Spanish               | Expresiones Idiomáticas
  Idiomatic Expressions             | y Refranes Ingleses y
  and Proverbs                  347 | Españoles                        347
                                    |
  Vocabulary of Business            | Vocabulario de Términos
  Words and Expressions             | y Expresiones
  in Everyday                       | Comerciales de Uso
  Use                           361 | Diario                           361
                                    |
  English, American and             | Monedas, Medidas y
  Spanish Coins,                    | Pesos Ingleses,
  Measures and Weights          408 | Americanos y Españoles           408




REMARKS ON PRONUNCIATION.


THE SPANISH ALPHABET.

The Spanish Alphabet consists of =28= letters:

  =A a=   ah      | =J j=   [A]hotah  | =R r= ereh (or erreh)
  =B b=   beh     | =K k=   kah       | =S s= esseh
  =C C=   theh    | =L l=   elleh     | =T t= teh
  =Ch ch= cheh    | =Ll ll= elyeh     | =U u= oo
  =D d=   deh     | =M m=   emmeh     | =V v= veh
  =E e=   eh      | =N n=   enneh     | =X x= ehkis
  =F f=   effeh   | =Ñ ñ=   enyeh     | =Y y= yeh (or ee gree-eh´gah)
  =G g=  [1]heh   | =O o=   oh        | =Z z= thehtah
  =H h=   acheh   | =P p=   peh       |
  =I i=   ee      | =Q q=   coo       |

The letter _k_ occurs only in words of foreign origin.

The vowels are: _a_, _e_, _i_, _o_, _u_. The letter _y_ is a vowel also
at the end of a word, as in _rey_, king, and in the conjunction _y_,
and.


ACCENTS AND SIGNS.

The acute accent (´) is the only one now in use in Spanish, and it
serves to indicate the syllable on which stress is to be laid. It marks
departures from the rule that words of two or more syllables ending in a
vowel or _n_ or _s_ are stressed on the last syllable but one, and those
ending in a consonant (except _n_ and _s_), on the final syllable. It
is used also to distinguish between words of the same spelling but
different meanings, and is placed over the preposition _a_, and the
conjunctions _e_, _o_ and _u_, when emphasised. The conjunction _o_ must
always be accented when used with figures.

Formerly, the grave accent (`) and the circumflex (^) were also in use
in Spanish, all three accents being used indiscriminately to indicate
the stressed syllable. The circumflex was used also on the vowel
following _ch_ and _x_ in old Spanish spelling, to indicate that these
letters were to be pronounced like _k_ and _ks_ respectively.

The diæresis (¨) is placed over the _u_ in the syllables _gue_ and _gui_
when the _u_ is to be pronounced, as in the words _agüero_, omen;
_argüir_, to argue.

The hyphen (-) is used at the end of a line to connect the syllables of
a divided word. It is also used in a few compound words.

The tilde (~) is used over the letter _n_ only, and gives that letter a
sound very similar to that of _ni_ in the English word _opinion_.

It was originally a sign of abbreviation, and indicated the omission of
an _m_ or _n_.

The interrogation (?) and exclamation (!) marks are used before and
after the sentence in Spanish, being inverted (¿ ¡) when preceding.

Other punctuation marks are used as in English.


PRONUNCIATION OF THE VOWELS.

_Note._--Spanish vowels have each one sound only, but this sound is
influenced by accent or stress, the emphasised vowel being naturally
longer or fuller than the same vowel when not emphasised.

=a= is sounded like _a_ in _far_ or in _fat_: _mar_, sea; _sal_, salt;

=e= like _a_ in _mate_, or _e_ in _met_: _mesa_, table; _venta_, sale;

=i= like _i_ in _marine_ or in _pin_: _mina_, mine; _fin_, end;

=o= like _o_ in _note_ or in _not_: _cono_, cone; _con_, with;

=u= like _u_ in _rule_ or in _full_: _luna_, moon; _mundo_, world.

=y=, as a vowel, has the same sound as _i_: _muy_, very; _ley_, law.


COMPOUND VOWELS.

These consist of combinations formed with the strong vowels _a_, _e_,
_o_, each of which, when they meet, is pronounced as forming a separate
syllable:

=ae=, =ao=, as in _faena_, task; _nao_, ship.

=ea=, =eo=, as in _correa_, strap; _empleo_, employment.

=oa=, =oe=, as in _loa_, praise; _poema_, poem.


DIPHTHONGS.

These are formed by combining one of the strong vowels, _a_, _e_, _o_,
with one of the weak vowels, _i_, _u_, or by a combination of the two
weak vowels alone. In the former the stress falls on the strong vowel,
and in the latter on the second;

=ai (ay), au=, as in _aire_, air; _causa_, cause;

=ei (ey), eu=, as in _seis_, six; _neutro_, neuter;

=ia, ie, io, iu=, as in _diario_, daily; _viuda_, widow;

=oi (oy), ou=, as in _boina_, cap; _bou_, fishing-boat;

=ua, ue, ui (uy), uo=, as in _agua_, water; _ruido_, noise.


TRIPHTHONGS.

These are a combination of the two weak vowels with one of the strong
ones:

=iai, iei=, as in _apreciáis_, ye appreciate; _apreciéis_ (that) ye
appreciate;

=uai, uei=, as in _averiguáis_, ye verify; _averigüéis,_ (that) ye
verify.


PRONUNCIATION OF THE CONSONANTS.

The following letters are pronounced generally as in English: _b_, _d_,
_f_, _k_, _l_, _m_, _n_, _p_, _r_, _s_, _t_, _v_, _x_ and _y_
(consonant). It should, however, be noted that the _b_ is slightly
softer than in English, as is also the _d_ at or towards the end of a
word; that the _r_ is always trilled, the _s_ always hissed, and the _t_
pronounced close to the teeth.

=c= before _a_, _o_, _u_, and before a consonant, is pronounced like
_k_: _capa_, cape; _crema_, cream: before _e_ and _i_ it has the sound
of _th_ in _bath_: _cera_, wax; _cima_, summit.

=ch= is always sounded like _ch_ in _check_: _coche_, carriage; _ocho_,
eight.

=g= before _a_, _o_, _u_, and before a consonant, is pronounced like _g_
in _go_: _goma_, gum; _grano_, grain: before _e_ and _i_ it is sounded
like _h_ strongly aspirated in the throat: _gente_, people; _gitano_,
gipsy. The pronunciation of _gua_ is _gwah_: _guante_, glove; _guardia_,
guard; and _gue_ and _gui_ are sounded as in _guess_ and _guild_,
respectively: _guerra_, war; _guitarra_, guitar; but _güe_ and _güi_ are
pronounced _gweh_ and _gwee_: _vergüenza_, shame; _lingüista_, linguist.

=h= is always silent: _harina_, flour; _anhelo_, eagerness.

=j= has always the same sound as that given to _g_ before _e_ and _i_:
_jabón_, soap; _hoja_, leaf.

=ll= has a sound very similar to that of _lli_ in _million_: _llave_,
key; _tallo_, stalk.

=ñ= is sounded like _ni_ in _minion_: _cuña_, wedge; _daño_, damage.

=q= is always followed by _u_, the two together being sounded like _k_:
_quedo_, quiet; _quinto_, fifth.

=z= has the same sound always as that of _c_ before _e_ and _i_:
_zarza_, bramble; _zona_, zone.


ARTICULATION.

In Spanish, every syllable is pronounced, and every stressed or accented
syllable is strongly emphasised. Every vowel, also, is given its proper
sound, generally, as in the alphabet, a shorter or weaker sound, as when
unaccented or unstressed, being the principal variation. The only silent
letters in ordinary speech are the consonant _h_, and the vowel _u_ in
the combinations _gue_, _gui_, _que_, _qui_; but, colloquially, several
other letters are either silent, or nearly so, in certain positions; as,
for example, _b_ before _sc_ or _st_; _d_ at or towards the end of a
word, especially in the word _usted_ (you); _n_ in _trans_, principally
before a consonant; and _p_ before _t_. Spanish articulation is somewhat
more emphatic than English, especially towards the end of a sentence.




HOSSFELD'S

  SPANISH                | DIÁLOGOS
  DIALOGUES              | ESPAÑOLES


PART I.

WORDS OF FREQUENT OCCURRENCE.

PRIMERA PARTE.

PALABRAS DE USO FRECUENTE.

    ENGLISH.           ESPAÑOL.

    INGLÉS.            SPANISH.

                 |                 |
The Days of the_ |_Los Días de la_ |
Week._           |_Semana._        |
                 |                 |
Sunday           |Domingo          |
Monday           |Lunes            |
Tuesday          |Martes           |
Wednesday        |Miércoles        |
Thursday         |Jueves           |
Friday           |Viernes          |
Saturday         |Sábado           |
                 |                 |
                 |                 |
_The Months._    |_Los Meses._     |
                 |                 |
January          |Enero            |
February         |Febrero          |
March            |Marzo            |
April            |Abril            |
May              |Mayo             |
June             |Junio            |
July             |Julio            |
August           |Agosto           |
September        |Setiembre        |
October          |Octubre          |
November         |Noviembre        |
December         |Diciembre        |



_Division of Time._      |_División del Tiempo._             |
                         |                                   |
a century                |un siglo                           |
a year                   |un año                             |
last year                |el año pasado                      |
next year                |el año próximo                     |
the coming year          |el año que viene                   |
leap year                |el año bisiesto                    |
a month                  |un mes                             |
a fortnight              |una quincena, quince               |
                         |días                               |
a week                   |una semana, ocho días              |
last week                |la semana pasada                   |
next week                |la semana próxima                  |
a day                    |un día                             |
an hour                  |una hora                           |
an hour and a half       |hora y media[2]                    |
half an hour             |media hora                         |
a quarter of an          |un cuarto de hora                  |
hour                     |                                   |
a minute                 |un minuto                          |
a second                 |un segundo                         |
the morning              |la mañana                          |
noon, midday             |mediodía                           |
forenoon                 |mañana                             |
afternoon                |tarde                              |
the evening              |la tarde                           |
the night                |la noche                           |
midnight                 |medianoche                         |
to-day                   |hoy                                |
yesterday                |ayer                               |
to-morrow                |mañana                             |
the day before yesterday |anteayer                           |
the day after to-morrow  |pasado mañana                      |
in the morning           |por la mañana                      |
in the evening           |por la tarde                       |
in olden times           |en otros tiempos                   |
in our times             |en nuestros días                   |
at all times             |en todos los tiempos               |
time to come             |lo futuro, lo venidero             |
from this time           |desde ahora, desde hoy en adelante |
from time to time        |de cuando en cuando                |
in good time             |a tiempo, a buena hora             |


_Seasons and Special_ |_Las Estaciones y Días_  |
_Days._               |_de Fiesta._             |
                      |                         |
Spring                |la primavera             |
Summer                |el verano                |
Autumn                |el otoño                 |
Winter                |el invierno              |
New-year's day        |día de año nuevo         |
Shrove Tuesday        |Martes de carnestolendas |
Carnival              |Carnaval                 |
Ash Wednesday         |Miércoles de ceniza      |
Lent                  |Cuaresma                 |
Good Friday           |Viernes Santo            |
Easter                |Pascua                   |
Whitsuntide           |Pentecostés              |
Midsummer day         |día de San Juan          |
Christmas             |Navidad                  |
Bank holiday          |día de fiesta.           |
holidays              |las vacaciones           |
birthday              |el cumpleaños            |
an anniversary        |un aniversario           |



_Man and Relationship_             |_El Hombre y el_
                                   |_Parentesco._
                                   |
a man                              |un hombre
a woman                            |una mujer
a boy                              |un muchacho
a girl                             |una muchacha
the children                       |los niños
an old man                         |un viejo, un anciano
an old woman                       |una vieja, una anciana
a young man                        |un joven
a young woman                      |una joven
the young people                   |los jóvenes
a married man                      |un casado
a married woman                    |una casada
a bachelor                         |un soltero
a spinster                         |una soltera
a widower                          |un viudo
a widow                            |una viuda
an orphan                          |un huérfano, una huérfana
birth                              |el nacimiento
death                              |la muerte
infancy                            |la infancia, la niñez
youth                              |la juventud
manhood                            |la virilidad
of age                             |mayor de edad
under age                          |menor de edad
old age                            |la vejez
sex                                |el sexo
the stern sex                      |el sexo feo
the fair sex                       |el bello sexo
matrimony, marriage                |el matrimonio
the family                         |la familia
the father                         |el padre
the mother                         |la madre
the parents                        |los padres
the relations                      |los parientes
the grandfather                    |el abuelo
the grandmother                    |la abuela
the great-grandfather              |el bisabuelo
the great-grandmother              |la bisabuela
the stepfather                     |el padrastro
the stepmother                     |la madrastra
the godfather                      |el padrino
the godmother                      |la madrina
the son                            |el hijo
the daughter                       |la hija
the grandson                       |el nieto
the grand-daughter                 |la nieta
the step-son                       |el hijastro
the step-daughter                  |la hijastra
the godson                         |el ahijado
the god-daughter                   |la ahijada
the brother                        |el hermano
the sister                         |la hermana
the twins                          |los gemelos
the uncle                          |el tío
the aunt                           |la tía
the nephew                         |el sobrino
the niece                          |la sobrina
the cousin                         |el primo, la prima
the first cousin                   |el primo hermano
the husband                        |el marido, el esposo
the wife                           |la mujer, la esposa
a father-in-law                    |un suegro
a mother-in-law                    |una suegra
a son-in-law                       |un yerno
a daughter-in-law                  |una nuera
a brother-in-law                   |un cuñado
a sister-in-law                    |una cuñada
forefathers                        |los abuelos
ancestors                          |los antepasados
offspring                          |los descendientes
                                   |
                                   |
_The State, Dignities,_            |_El Estado, Dignidades,_
_etc._                             |_etc._
                                   |
the state                          |el estado
the statesman                      |el estadista
the empire, imperial               |el imperio, imperial
the kingdom, royal                 |el reino, real
the republic, republican           |la república, republicano
the principality                   |el principado
the nation                         |la nación
the country                        |el país
the province                       |la provincia
the county                         |el condado
the city, town                     |la ciudad
the ward, district                 |el barrio
the suburb                         |el arrabal
the village                        |la aldea
the emperor                        |el emperador
the empress                        |la emperatriz
the king                           |el rey
the queen                          |la reina
the president                      |el presidente
the prince                         |el príncipe
the princess                       |la princesa
the duke                           |el duque
the duchess                        |la duquesa
the count, earl                    |el conde
the countess                       |la condesa
the viscount                       |el vizconde
the viscountess                    |la vizcondesa
the marquis                        |el marqués
the marchioness                    |la marquesa
the baron                          |el barón
the baroness                       |la baronesa
the viceroy                        |el virrey
the governor                       |el gobernador
the authorities                    |las autoridades
parliament                         |el parlamento[3]
a member of parliament             |un miembro del parlamento
the government                     |el gobierno
the ministry                       |el ministerio
a minister                         |un ministro
the embassy                        |la embajada
the legation                       |la legación
an ambassador                      |un embajador
the consulate                      |el consulado
a consul                           |un cónsul
the mayor                          |el alcalde
the police                         |la policía
a policeman                        |un policía, un municipal
the inhabitants                    |los habitantes
a citizen                          |un ciudadano
justice                            |la justicia
the court of justice               |el tribunal
the judge                          |el juez
the jury                           |el jurado
the magistrate                     |el magistrado
the justice of the peace           |el juez de paz
the laws                           |las leyes
the lawyer                         |el abogado
the trial                          |el proceso, la causa
the lawsuit                        |el pleito, el proceso
the judgment                       |el fallo, el juicio,
the verdict                        |el veredicto
the sentence                       |la sentencia
the prison                         |la cárcel
the prisoner                       |el preso, el detenido
education                          |la educación, la instrucción
study                              |el estudio
the university                     |la universidad
the professor                      |el profesor, el catedrático
the school                         |la escuela
the teacher                        |el maestro, la maestra
the student                        |el estudiante
the scholar                        |el discípulo
business                           |los negocios
the business-house, the firm       |la casa de comercio, la firma
the merchant                       |el comerciante
the clerk                          |el dependiente
merchandise, goods                 |las mercancías, los géneros
banking                            |la banca
the bank                           |el banco
the banker                         |el banquero
trade                              |el comercio
taxes                              |los impuestos
the custom-house                   |la aduana
customs                            |los derechos de aduana
                                   |
                                   |
_The Army._                        |_El Ejército._
                                   |
infantry                           |la infantería
cavalry                            |la caballería
artillery                          |la artillería
the engineers                      |los ingenieros
a division                         |una división
a brigade                          |una brigada
a regiment                         |un regimiento
a battalion                        |un batallón
a company                          |una compañía
a squadron                         |un escuadrón
the commander-in-chief             |el generalísimo, el capitán general
the general                        |el general
the lieutenant-general             |el teniente-general
the major-general                  |el mariscal de campo
the colonel                        |el coronel
the lieutenant-colonel             |el teniente-coronel
the major                          |el comandante
a captain                          |un capitán
a lieutenant                       |un teniente
the adjutant                       |el ayudante
the sergeant-major                 |el sargento primero
a sergeant                         |un sargento
a corporal                         |un cabo
an officer                         |un oficial
a soldier                          |un soldado
the staff                          |el estado mayor
the ranks                          |las filas
a sentinel, sentry                 |un centinela
the colours                        |la bandera
the uniform                        |el uniforme
the arms                           |las armas
a gun                              |un fusil
a bayonet                          |una bayoneta
a sword                            |una espada
a pistol                           |una pistola
a cannon                           |un cañón
a cannon-ball                      |una bala de cañón
a bullet                           |una bala
a cartridge                        |una cartucha
powder                             |la pólvora
a bomb                             |una bomba
war                                |la guerra
peace                              |la paz
the treaty                         |el tratado
the fortress                       |la fortaleza
the garrison                       |la guarnición
the barracks                       |el cuartel
the walls                          |los muros, las murallas
the trenches                       |las trincheras
the battle                         |la batalla
the victory                        |la victoria
                                   |
                                   |
_The Navy._                        |_La Marina._
                                   |
the fleet                          |la flota
a vessel                           |un buque, un navío
a man-of-war                       |un buque de guerra
a merchant ship                    |un buque mercante
an ironclad                        |un acorazado
a cruiser                          |un crucero
a gunboat                          |un cañonero
a torpedo-boat                     |un torpedero
a destroyer                        |un destructor
a submarine                        |un submarino
a transport                        |un transporte
a privateer                        |un corsario
the flag                           |la bandera
a steamer                          |un vapor
a tug-boat, steam-tug              |un remolcador
to tow                             |remolcar, llevar a remolque
to take in tow                     |tomar a remolque
a ferry-boat, river steamer        |un bote de pasaje, vapor de río
a launch                           |una lancha
a yacht                            |un yate
a barge                            |una gabarra
a boat                             |un bote
a boatman                          |un botero
the oars                           |los remos
the sails                          |las velas
to sail, to set sail               |salir; hacerse a la mar (a la vela)
the anchor                         |el ancla
the anchorage                      |el ancladero
to anchor                          |anclar
to drop anchor                     |dar fondo
to weigh anchor                    |levar el ancla
on board                           |a bordo
the ship's hold                    |la bodega
the fore-hold                      |la bodega de proa
the after-hold                     |la bodega de popa
a cabin                            |una cámara
water-level                        |el nivel de agua
water-line, load-line              |la linea de carga, de flotacíon
cargo                              |la carga (a cargo, _un cargamento_)
ballast                            |el lastre
the bill of lading                 |el conocimiento
the charterers, freighters         |los fletadores
to charter (freight) a vessel      |fletar un buque
the admiral                        |el almirante
the vice-admiral                   |el vicealmirante
the rear-admiral                   |el contraalmirante
the captain                        |el capitán
the lieutenant                     |el teniente
the ensign                         |el alférez
the midshipman                     |el guardiamarina
the seaman                         |el marinero
the crew                           |la tripulación
a pilot                            |un práctico
a lighthouse                       |un faro
the port                           |el puerto
                                   |
                                   |
_Religion._                        |_La Religión._
                                   |
the catholic religion              |la religión católica
catholicism                        |el catolicismo
protestantism                      |el protestantismo
a catholic                         |un católico
a protestant                       |un protestante
a Jew                              |un judío
the cathedral                      |la catedral
the church                         |la iglesia
the chapel                         |la capilla
the temple                         |el templo
the synagogue                      |la sinagoga
the synod                          |el sínodo
divine service                     |el culto divino
the holy Scriptures                |las Sagradas Escrituras
the Bible                          |la Biblia
the Pope                           |el Papa
the cardinal                       |el cardenal
the archbishop                     |el arzobispo
the bishop                         |el obispo
the dean                           |el deán
the archdeacon                     |el archidiácono
the canon                          |el canónigo
the priest                         |el sacerdote, el cura
a parish priest                    |un cura párroco
a clergyman                        |un clérigo
a curate                           |un cura
a minister                         |un ministro
a chaplain                         |un capellán
a deacon                           |un diácono
a sexton                           |un sacristán
the mission                        |la misión
the missionary                     |el misionero
the sermon                         |el sermón
the preacher                       |el predicador
the monastery                      |el monasterio
the monk                           |el monje, el religioso
the convent                        |el convento
the nun                            |la monja, la religiosa
the sin                            |el pecado
penance, penitence                 |la penetencia
a saint                            |un santo, una santa
                                   |
                                   |
_Arts and Sciences._               |_Artes y Ciencias._
                                   |
art                                |el arte
an artist                          |un artista
science                            |la ciencia
a scientist                        |un científico
aeronautics                        |la aeronáutica
an aeronaut                        |un aeronauta
an aeroplane                       |un aeroplano
a balloon                          |un globo
an airship                         |un dirigible
analysis                           |el análisis
an analyst                         |un analista
archæology                         |la arqueología
an archæologist                    |un arqueólogo
architecture                       |la arquitectura
an architect                       |un arquitecto
a building                         |un edificio
astronomy                          |la astronomía
an astronomer                      |un astrónomo
the sun                            |el sol
the moon                           |la luna
the stars                          |las estrellas
the sky                            |el cielo
botany                             |la botánica
a botanist                         |un botánico
chemistry                          |la química
a chemist (analytical)             |un químico
a chemist (pharmaceutical)         |un farmacéutico, un boticario
a doctor                           |un médico
chemical substances                |sustancias químicas
engineering                        |la ingeniería
an engineer                        |un ingeniero
geography                          |la geografía
a geographer                       |un geógrafo
geometry                           |la geometría
a geometrician                     |un geómetra
grammar                            |la gramática
a grammarian                       |un gramático
history                            |la historia
a historian                        |un historiador
linguistics                        |la lingüística
a linguist                         |un lingüista
a polyglot                         |un políglota
an interpreter                     |un intérprete
a teacher of languages             |un profesor de lenguas
the language                       |la lengua, el idioma
literature                         |la literatura
a literary man                     |un literato
an author                          |un autor
a writer                           |un escritor
a work                             |una obra
the classics                       |los clásicos
lithography                        |la litografía
a lithographer                     |un litógrafo
mathematics                        |las matemáticas
a mathematician                    |un matemático
mechanics                          |la mecánica
a mechanician                      |un mecánico
mineralogy                         |la mineralogía
a mineralogist                     |un mineralogista
music                              |la música
a musician                         |un músico
painting                           |la pintura
a painter                          |un pintor
a picture                          |un cuadro
philosophy                         |la filosofía
a philosopher                      |un filósofo
physics                            |la física
a physicist                        |un físico
poetry                             |la poesía
a poet                             |un poeta
printing                           |la imprenta
a printer                          |un impresor
prints                             |estampas
types                              |tipos
prose                              |la prosa
a prose-writer                     |un prosista
sculpture                          |la escultura
a sculptor                         |un escultor
a statue                           |una estatua
the stage                          |el teatro
an actor                           |un actor
an actress                         |una actriz
a comedian                         |un comediante
a comedienne                       |una comedianta
a tragedian                        |un trágico
a tragedienne                      |una trágica
a dancer                           |un bailarín
a danseuse                         |una bailarina
a singer                           |un cantor, una cantora
the theatre                        |el teatro
the comedy                         |la comedia
the drama                          |el drama
the tragedy                        |la tragedia
the opera                          |la ópera
the musical play                   |la zarzuela
the pantomime                      |la pantomima
the ballet                         |el baile, el bailable
the performance                    |la función, la representación
to perform                         |representar
teaching                           |la enseñanza, la instrucción
a teacher                          |un maestro, una maestra
theology                           |la teología
a theologian                       |un teólogo
translation                        |la traducción
a translator                       |un traductor
weaving                            |el tejido
a weaver                           |un tejedor
                                   |
                                   |
_Commerce._                        |_Comercio._[4]
                                   |
trade                              |el comercio, los negocios
trade-mark                         |marca de fábrica
trade-price                        |precio de fábrica
foreign trade                      |el comercio exterior
home trade                         |el comercio interior
the acceptance                     |la aceptación
the account                        |la cuenta
account books                      |libros de cuentas
account current                    |cuenta corriente
to settle an account               |saldar una cuenta
an agent                           |un agente
a bank                             |un banco
a banker                           |un banquero
banking                            |la banca
bankruptcy                         |la bancarrota, la quiebra
a bankrupt                         |un quebrado, un fallido
to go bankrupt                     |quebrar
a bill of exchange                 |una letra de cambio
a bill at sight                    |una letra a la vista
at three months' sight             |a tres meses vista
due date                           |el vencimiento
falling due ...                    |venci endo ...
to accept a bill                   |aceptar una letra
to discount a bill                 |descontar una letra
to draw a bill on someone          |girar una letra sobre alguno
to endorse a bill                  |endosar una letra
to meet a bill                     |hacer honor a una letra
to protest a bill                  |protestar una letra
a broker                           |un corredor
a buyer                            |un comprador
buying                             |la compra
carriage, forwarding               |el transporte, la conducción
carriage, freight                  |el porte, los gastos de transporte
carriage free                      |franco de porte, porte pagado
carriage paid                      |porte pagado
charges                            |los gastos
a cheque                           |un cheque
a cheque-book                      |un libro de cheques, un talonario
commission                         |la comisión
a company                          |una compañía
a limited company                  |una compañía anónima
a contract                         |un contrato
credit                             |el crédito
a letter of credit                 |una carta de crédito
a creditor                         |un acreedor
debit                              |el débito
a debt                             |una deuda
a debtor                           |un deudor
Dr. and Cr.                        |Debe y Haber
delivery                           |la entrega
discount                           |el descuento, la rebaja
duty                               |los derechos
to pay duty                        |pagar derechos
expenses                           |los gastos
export, exportation                |la exportación
to export                          |exportar
an exporter                        |un exportador
failure                            |la quiebra
to fail                            |quebrar
a firm                             |una casa de comercio
freight                            |el flete
to freight a ship                  |fletar un buque
goods                              |los géneros, las mercancías
import, importation                |la importación
to import                          |importar
an importer                        |un importador
insolvency                         |la insolvencia
insurance                          |el seguro
to insure goods                    |asegurar los géneros
an insurance policy                |una póliza de seguro
an invoice                         |una factura
to invoice                         |facturar
a letter                           |una carta
to acknowledge receipt of a letter |acusar recibo de una carta
to reply to a letter               |contestar a una carta
the mail                           |el correo
the manager                        |el gerente
a merchant                         |un comerciante
a middleman                        |un intermediario
the office                         |la oficina, el despacho
an order                           |una orden, un pedido
a pattern                          |una muestra
payment                            |el pago
to pay                             |pagar
the post                           |el correo
the price                          |el precio
a purchase                         |una compra
the purchaser                      |el comprador
a receipt                          |un recibo
to receipt                         |dar recibo, poner el recibí
remittance                         |la remesa
retail                             |al por menor
the sale                           |la venta
a seller                           |un vendedor
selling                            |la venta
shares                             |las acciones
a shareholder                      |un accionista
a signature                        |una firma
stocks                             |los fondos (efectos) públicos
a stockbroker                      |un corredor de cambios
a traveller                        |un viajante
a warehouse, store                 |un almacén, un depósito
to warehouse                       |almacenar
a warehouseman                     |un almacenero, un guardaalmacén
wholesale                          |al por mayor
                                   |
                                   |
_Money._                           |_Monedas._
                                   |
a guinea                           |una guinea
a sovereign                        |un soberano
a pound (sterling)                 |una libra (esterlina)[5]
a shilling                         |un chelín
a sixpence                         |un medio chelín
a penny                            |un penique
a halfpenny                        |un medio penique
a dollar                           |un duro, un peso
a cent                             |un centavo
a franc                            |un franco
a centime                          |un céntimo
a banknote                         |un billete de banco
the course of exchange             |el curso del cambio
the rate of exchange               |el tipo del cambio
the Exchange (of London)           |la Bolsa (de Londres)
a money changer                    |un cambista
gold coin(s)                       |moneda de oro
silver coin(s)                     |moneda de plata
copper coin(s)                     |moneda de cobre; calderilla
English money                      |moneda inglesa
                                   |
                                   |
_Professions and_                  |_Profesiones y Oficios._
_Trades._                          |
                                   |
an accountant                      |un contador
an actuary                         |un actuario
an advocate                        |un abogado
an agent                           |un agente
an analyst                         |un analista
an architect                       |un arquitecto
an artist                          |un artista
an assayer                         |un ensayador
an attorney                        |un procurador
an auctioneer                      |un rematador
a baker                            |un panadero
a banker                           |un banquero
a barber                           |un barbero
a barrister                        |un abogado
a blacksmith                       |un herrero
a bookbinder                       |un encuadernador
a bookseller                       |un librero
a bootmaker                        |un zapatero
a brewer                           |un cervecero
a broker                           |un corredor
a builder                          |un maestro de obras
a butcher                          |un carnicero
a cabinet-maker                    |un ebanista
a carpenter                        |un carpintero
a carter                           |un carretero
a chemist                          |un químico; (apothecary) boticario.
a clerk                            |un dependiente
a composer                         |un compositor
a compositor                       |un cajista
a confectioner                     |un confitero
a contractor                       |un contratista
a cook                             |un cocinero
a cooper                           |un tonelero
a dentist                          |un dentista
a doctor                           |un médico
a draper                           |un pañero
a draughtsman                      |un dibujante
a dressmaker                       |una modista, una costurera
a druggist                         |un droguero, un droguista
an editor                          |un redactor
an engineer                        |un ingeniero, un maquinista
an engraver                        |un grabador
a farmer                           |un agricultor
a fisherman                        |un pescador
a fishmonger                       |un pescadero
a fruiterer                        |un frutero
a gardener                         |un jardinero
a gasfitter                        |un instalador de gas
a glazier                          |un vidriero
a grocer                           |un especiero
a guide, conductor                 |un guía
a gunsmith                         |un armero
a hairdresser                      |un peluquero
a hatter                           |un sombrerero
a hosier                           |un mediero, un calcetero
an hotel-keeper                    |un fondista
an innkeeper                       |un posadero
an interpreter                     |un intérprete
a jeweller                         |un joyero
a joiner                           |un ensamblador
a journalist                       |un periodista
a laundress                        |una lavandera
a lawyer                           |un abogado, un letrado
a linen-draper                     |un lencero
a locksmith                        |un cerrajero
a mason                            |un albañil
a miller                           |un molinero
a milliner                         |una modista (de sombreros)
a musician                         |un músico
a newsagent                        |un vendedor de periódicos
an oculist                         |un oculista
an optician                        |un óptico
a painter                          |un pintor
a photographer                     |un fotógrafo
a physician                        |un médico consultor
a plumber                          |un plomero
a porter                           |un mozo (de cordel)
a postman                          |un cartero
a poulterer                        |un pollero
a printer                          |un impresor
a professor                        |un profesor
a publisher                        |un editor
a railway official                 |un empleado del ferrocarril
a saddler                          |un sillero
a sculptor                         |un escultor
a seamstress                       |una costurera
a shoemaker                        |un zapatero
a shopkeeper                       |un tendero
a solicitor                        |un procurador
a stationer                        |un papelero
a stockbroker                      |un corredor de cambios
a surgeon                          |un cirujano
a surveyor                         |un inspector; (land) agrimensor
a tailor                           |un sastre
a teacher                          |un maestro
a tinker                           |un calderero
a tobacconist                      |un estanquero
a translator                       |un traductor
a traveller                        |un viajero, un viajante
a tutor                            |un preceptor
an upholsterer                     |un tapicero
a waiter                           |un mozo (de café)
a watchmaker                       |un relojero
                                   |
                                   |
Sports, Pastimes, etc._            |_Deportes, Pasatiempos, etc._
                                   |
angling                            |la pesca
athletics                          |la atlética
bagatelle                          |la bagatela
billiards                          |el billar
bowls                              |los bolos
boxing                             |el boxeo, el pugilato
bull-fight                         |la corrida de toros
cards                              |los naipes
chess                              |el ajedrez
coursing                           |la caza de liebres
cricket                            |el cricket
croquet                            |el croquet
cycling                            |el paseo en bicicleta
dominoes                           |el dominó
draughts                           |las damas
driving                            |el paseo en coche
fencing                            |la esgrima
fives                              |la pelota
football                           |el football, el balonpié
golf                               |el golf
gymnastics                         |la gimnasia
hockey                             |el hockey
hunting                            |la caza
needlework                         |las labores
polo                               |el polo
quoits                             |el tejo
racing                             |las carreras
reading                            |la lectura
riding                             |el paseo a caballo
rowing                             |el remar
skating                            |el patinar, la patinación
swimming                           |el nadar, la natación
tennis                             |el tennis
walking                            |el paseo
whist                              |el whist
wrestling                          |la lucha
yachting                           |el viajar en yate
an Aunt Sally                      |un pim pam pum
a roundabout                       |un tío vivo
a swing                            |un columpio
a switchback                       |una montaña rusa
                                   |
                                   |
_Railways._                        |_Ferrocarriles._
                                   |
a railway                          |un ferrocarril
the station                        |la estación
the station-master                 |el jefe de estación
the platform                       |el andén
the waiting-room                   |la sala de espera
the booking-office                 |el despacho de billetes
a time-table                       |una guía, un indicador
the fare                           |el precio (del billete)
a ticket for ...                   |un billete para ...
first, second, third class         |de primera, segunda, tercera clase
an excursion ticket                |un billete de excursión
a return ticket                    |un billete de ida y vuelta
a season ticket                    |un billete de temporada
a single ticket                    |un billete sencillo
a through ticket                   |un billete directo
the luggage                        |el equipaje
the porter                         |el mozo (de equipajes de estación)
the cloak-room                     |el depósito de equipajes
the train                          |el tren
an excursion train                 |un tren de excursión
                                   |(de recreo; pop.: tren botijo)
an express train                   |un tren expreso
a fast train                       |un tren rápido
a goods train                      |un tren de mercancías
a mail train                       |un tren correo
a mixed train                      |un tren mixto
a passenger train                  |un tren de viajeros
a slow train                       |un tren ordinario
a special train                    |un tren especial
a through train                    |un tren directo
the train starts                   |el tren sale
the train arrives                  |el tren llega
the line                           |la linea, la vía
the rails                          |los carriles
a tunnel                           |un túnel
a viaduct                          |un viaducto
the engine                         |la locomotora[6]
the engine-driver                  |el maquinista
the tender                         |el ténder
the stoker                         |el fogonero
the carriage                       |el coche, el vagón
the door                           |la portezuela
the window                         |la ventanilla
the van                            |el furgón
the guard                          |el conductor, el jefe de tren
a passenger                        |un viajero, un pasajero
                                   |
                                   |
_A Steamship_                      |_Un Vapor._
                                   |
a steamer                          |un vapor
a steam-boat                       |un buque de vapor
a steam-packet                     |un paquebote de vapor
the cabin                          |la cámara, el camarote
a private cabin                    |un camarote
a berth                            |una litera
steerage                           |la proa, el entrepuente
on deck                            |sobre cubierta
the boats                          |los botes
a life-boat                        |un bote salvavidas
a life-belt                        |un chaleco salvavidas
a life-buoy                        |una boya salvavidas
the hull                           |el casco
the masts                          |los mástiles, los palos
the yards                          |las vergas
the sails                          |las velas, el velamen
the rigging                        |el aparejo, la cordelería
the bridge                         |el puente
the funnel                         |la chimenea
the engine                         |la máquina
the helm                           |el timón
the compass                        |la brújula
the anchor                         |el ancla
the cable                          |el cable
                                   |
                                   |
_A Journey._                       |_Un Viaje._
                                   |
a journey                          |un viaje
a traveller                        |un viajero
baggage                            |el equipaje
a portmanteau                      |una maleta
a trunk                            |un baúl
a passport                         |un pasaporte
to travel from ... to ...          |ir de ... a ...
customs                            |la aduana
a letter of credit                 |una carta de crédito
a pleasure trip                    |un viaje de recreo
to take a ticket                   |tomar un billete
to take a seat                     |retener un asiento
to change trains at ...            |cambiar de tren en ...
a cab                              |un coche (de punto, de plaza)
a taxi, a taxi-cab                 |un taxi (un taxímetro),
                                   |un auto (un automóvil)
a carriage                         |un carruaje
the diligence, the stage-coach     |la diligencia
the motor-bus                      |el ómnibus automóvil
the tram, the tram-car             |el tranvía, el coche de tranvía
the underground railway, the tube  |el ferrocarril subterráneo
an outside seat                    |un asiento en la imperial
an inside seat                     |un asiento en el interior
                                   |
                                   |
_The Office._                      |_La Oficina._
                                   |
letter-paper                       |papel de cartas
note-paper                         |papel de esquelas
fancy paper                        |papel de fantasía
a quire of paper                   |una mano de papel
envelopes                          |los sobres
a pen                              |una pluma
a fountain-pen                     |una pluma-tintero
the inkstand                       |el tintero
ink                                |la tinta
blotting-paper                     |papel secante
a pencil                           |un lápiz
a study                            |un estudio
a writing-desk                     |un escritorio, un pupitre
a roll-top desk                    |un escritorio de tapa corrediza
                                   |  (de tapa rodadera)
a writing-case                     |una cartera, una papelera
a note-book                        |un cuaderno, una libreta,
                                   |  un libro de apuntes
writing                            |la escritura, la letra
to write a letter                  |escribir una carta
to dictate a letter                |dictar una carta
to answer a letter                 |contestar, responder a una carta
to write a good hand               |tener buena letra
a typewriter                       |una máquina de escribir
a typist                           |un dactilógrafo, un mecanógrafo
a shorthand-writer                 |un taquígrafo
a postage-stamp                    |un sello
a post-card                        |una tarjeta postal
a telegram                         |un telegrama
the telephone                      |el teléfono
mail-day                           |el día del correo
post-paid                          |franqueado, franco
sealing-wax                        |el lacre
                                   |
                                   |
_Parts of the Body._               |_Partes del Cuerpo._
                                   |
the human body                     |el cuerpo humano
the head                           |la cabeza
the hair                           |los cabellos
the skull                          |el cráneo
the brain(s)                       |el cerebro, los sesos
the face                           |la cara
the forehead                       |la frente
the temples                        |las sienes
the eyes                           |los ojos
the eyebrows                       |las cejas
the eyelids                        |los párpados
the eyelashes                      |las pestañas
the ears                           |las orejas
the nose                           |la nariz
the nostrils                       |las ventanas de la nariz
the cheeks                         |las mejillas
the jaw                            |la quijada, la mandíbula
the mouth                          |la boca
the lips                           |los labios
the upper lip                      |el labio superior
the lower lip                      |el labio inferior
the teeth                          |los dientes
the front teeth                    |los incisivos
the back teeth                     |las muelas, los molares
the gums                           |las encías
the tongue                         |la lengua
the chin                           |la barba
the moustache                      |el bigote
the beard                          |la barba
the whiskers                       |las patillas
the neck                           |el cuello
the nape                           |la nuca
the throat                         |la garganta
the shoulders                      |los hombros
the arms                           |los brazos
the armpit                         |el sobaco
the elbow                          |el codo
the wrist                          |la muñeca
the hand                           |la mano
the fist                           |el puño
the fingers                        |los dedos
the thumb                          |el pulgar
the forefinger                     |el índice
the middle finger                  |el dedo del corazón
the ring finger                    |el dedo anular
the little finger                  |el meñique
the nails                          |las uñas
the chest                          |el pecho
the heart                          |el corazón
the lungs                          |los pulmones
the back                           |la espalda
the spine                          |la espina dorsal
the ribs                           |las costillas
the abdomen                        |el abdomen
the stomach                        |el estómago
the liver                          |el hígado
the spleen                         |el bazo
the intestines                     |los intestinos
the bladder                        |la vejiga
the sides                          |los costados
the hips                           |las caderas
the groin                          |la ingle
the legs                           |las piernas
the thigh                          |el muslo
the knee                           |la rodilla
the knee-cap                       |la rótula
the calf                           |la pantorrilla
the ankle                          |el tobillo
the foot                           |el pie
the instep                         |el empeine
the heel                           |el talón
the toes                           |los dedos del pie
the sole (of the foot)             |la planta (del pie)
the skeleton                       |el esqueleto
the bones                          |los huesos
the joint                          |la articulación
the skin                           |la piel
the flesh                          |la carne
the muscles                        |los músculos
the nerves                         |los nervios
the sinews                         |los tendones
the fat                            |la grasa, la gordura
the blood                          |la sangre
an artery                          |una arteria
a vein                             |una vena
                                   |
                                   |
_Ailments, Remedies,_              |_Enfermedades, Remedios,_
_etc._                             |_etc._
                                   |
an abscess                         |un absceso
asthma                             |el asma
a bandage                          |una venda, un vendaje
biliousness                        |la bilis
a boil                             |un divieso
bronchitis                         |la bronquitis
a bruise                           |una contusión
a burn                             |una quemadura
camphor                            |el alcanfor
cancer                             |el cáncer
castor-oil                         |el aceite de ricino
catarrh                            |el catarro
a chap                             |una grieta
a chilblain                        |un sabañón
a chill                            |un frío
cod-liver oil                      |el aceite de hígado de bacalao
a cold                             |un constipado, un resfriado
constipation                       |el estreñimiento
a consultation                     |una consulta
consumption                        |la tisis
a cough                            |una tos
court-plaster                      |el tafetán inglés
cramp                              |el calambre
a crutch                           |una muleta
a cut                              |una cortadura, una herida
diarrhoea                          |la diarrea
diphtheria                         |la difteria
dizziness                          |un vahído, un vértigo
a dose                             |una dósis
dressing                           |las hilas, los vendajes
dropsy                             |la hidropesía
dysentery                          |la disentería
earache                            |el dolor de oídos
an emetic                          |un emético
fever                              |la fiebre
a fit                              |un accidente, una convulsión
a fracture                         |una fractura
a gargle                           |una gárgara
gout                               |la gota
headache                           |el dolor de cabeza, la jaqueca
heart-disease                      |la enfermedad del corazón
hoarseness                         |la ronquera, la afonía
indigestion                        |una indigestión
inflammation                       |una inflamación
influenza                          |la influenza, el dengue, el trancazo
jaundice                           |la ictericia
laudanum                           |el láudano
liniment                           |el linimento, la untura
linseed                            |la linaza
lint                               |las hilas
liver-complaint                    |la enfermedad del hígado
massage                            |el masaje
neuralgia                          |la neuralgia
ointment                           |el ungüento
piles                              |las almorranas
a pill                             |una píldora
a pimple                           |un grano
a plaster                          |un emplasto
pneumonia                          |la neumonía, la pulmonía
a poultice                         |una cataplasma
a prescription                     |una receta
a purgative                        |un purgante
quinine                            |la quinina
quinsy                             |la angina
rheumatism                         |el reumatismo, el reuma
rhubarb                            |el ruibarbo
rupture                            |una hernia
salts (Epsom)                      |la sal de Epsom, la sal de higuera
a scald                            |una quemadura, una escaldadura
a scar                             |una cicatriz
a scratch                          |un arañazo, un rasguño
a sling                            |un cabestrillo
smallpox                           |las viruelas
sore throat                        |el mal de garganta
a splint                           |una tablilla
a sprain                           |una torcedura
stiff-neck                         |el tortícolis
a sting                            |una picadura
stomach-ache                       |el dolor de estómago
a stye                             |un orzuelo
a swelling                         |una hinchazón
a tonic                            |un tónico
toothache                          |el dolor de muelas
a truss                            |un braguero
a tumour                           |un tumor
an ulcer                           |una úlcera
vaccination                        |la vacunación
a wen                              |un lobanillo
a whitlow                          |un panadizo
a wound                            |una herida
                                   |
                                   |
_The Senses and_                   |_Los Sentidos y las_
_Actions._                         |_Acciones._
                                   |
sensibility                        |la sensibilidad
the five senses                    |los cinco sentidos
sight                              |la vista
to see, seen                       |ver, visto
hearing                            |el oído
to hear, heard                     |oir, oído
smell                              |el olfato
to smell, smelt                    |oler, olido
taste                              |el gusto
to taste, tasted                   |gustar, gustado
touch                              |el tacto
to touch, touched                  |tocar, tocado
a look, glance                     |una mirada
to look, looked                    |mirar, mirado
a sound, noise                     |un sonido, un ruido
to sound, sounded                  |sonar, sonado
scent, smell                       |el olor
to smell (of)                      |oler (a)
savour, taste                      |el sabor
to savour (of)                     |saber (a)
contact, touch                     |el contacto
to bring into contact              |poner en contacto
appetite                           |el apetito
to eat, eaten                      |comer, comido
breathing                          |la respiración
to breathe, breathed               |respirar, respirado
a call                             |una llamada
to call, called                    |llamar, llamado
a cry                              |un grito
to cry, cried                      |gritar, gritado
the dance, ball                    |la danza, el baile
to dance, danced                   |danzar, danzado;
bailar, bailado                    |
the digestion                      |la digestión
to digest, digested                |digerir, digerido
the dream                          |el sueño, el ensueño
to dream, dreamed                  |soñar, soñado
feeling                            |el sentimiento
to feel, felt                      |sentir, sentido
the gesture                        |el gesto
to gesticulate, gesticulated       |gesticular, gesticulado
the groan                          |el gemido
to groan, groaned                  |gemir, gemido
the hiccough                       |el hipo
to hiccough, hiccoughed            |hipar, hipado
hunger                             |el hambre
to be hungry                       |tener hambre
the laugh                          |la risa
to laugh, laughed                  |reir, reído
lisping                            |el ceceo
to lisp, lisped                    |cecear, ceceado
the prayer, request                |la petición, el ruego, la súplica
to ask, asked                      |pedir, pedido
to beg, begged                     |rogar, rogado
to pray, prayed                    |suplicar, suplicado
rest                               |el descanso
to rest, rested                    |descansar, descansado
the sigh                           |el suspiro
to sigh, sighed                    |suspirar, suspirado
sleep                              |el sueño
to sleep, slept                    |dormir, dormido
the smile                          |la sonrisa
to smile, smiled                   |sonreir, sonreído
sneezing                           |el estornudo
to sneeze, sneezed                 |estornudar, estornudado
snoring                            |el ronquido
to snore, snored                   |roncar, roncado
speech                             |la palabra
to speak, spoken                   |hablar, hablado
to make a speech                   |decir (pronunciar) un discurso
stammering                         |la tartamudez
to stammer, stammered              |tartamudear, tartamudeado
thirst                             |la sed
to be thirsty                      |tener sed
the voice                          |la voz
to utter, uttered                  |pronunciar, pronunciado
the walk                           |el andar
to walk, walked                    |andar, andado
to take a walk                     |dar un paseo, pasearse
to go, gone                        |ir, ido
to run, run                        |correr, corrido
yawning                            |el bostezo
to yawn, yawned                    |bostezar, bostezado
                                   |
                                   |
_Dress._                           |_Vestido._
                                   |
a hat                              |un sombrero
a cap                              |una gorra
a bonnet                           |un sombrero (de señora)
a straw hat                        |un sombrero de paja
a suit                             |un traje
a coat                             |una casaca
a morning-coat                     |un chaqué
a frock-coat                       |una levita
a dress-coat                       |un frac
an overcoat                        |un gabán, un abrigo
a jacket                           |una chaqueta, una americana
a vest, a waistcoat                |un chaleco
trousers                           |los pantalones
a dress                            |un vestido
a bodice                           |un corpiño, un jubón
a blouse                           |una blusa
a skirt                            |una falda
a petticoat                        |una saya
a mantle                           |un manto
a cloak                            |una capa
underlinen                         |la ropa interior
a shirt, chemise                   |una camisa
a night-shirt, night-gown          |una camisa de dormir
pyjamas, a sleeping-suit           |un traje de dormir
an under-vest                      |una camiseta, una elástica
drawers                            |los calzoncillos
combinations                       |las combinaciones
stockings                          |las medias
socks                              |los calcetines
a collar[7]                        |un cuello
cuffs                              |los puños
a necktie                          |una corbata
gloves                             |los guantes
a handkerchief                     |un pañuelo
boots                              |las botas, los zapatos
shoes                              |los zapatos
slippers                           |las zapatillas
a stick                            |un bastón
an umbrella                        |un paraguas
a sunshade                         |una sombrilla
a mackintosh                       |un impermeable
                                   |
                                   |
_Meals._                           |_Comidas._
                                   |
food                               |la comida, el alimento
to eat                             |comer
breakfast                          |el desayuno, el almuerzo
to breakfast                       |desayunarse, almorzar
lunch                              |el almuerzo, la merienda
to lunch                           |almorzar, merendar
dinner                             |la comida
to dine                            |comer
tea                                |el té
to take tea                        |tomar el té
supper                             |la cena
to sup                             |cenar
                                   |
                                   |
_Eatables and Drinks._             |_Comestibles y Bebidas._
                                   |
bread                              |el pan
butter                             |la manteca, la mantequilla
bread and butter                   |pan con manteca
soup                               |la sopa
bread soup                         |sopa de pan
gravy soup                         |caldo de sustancia
julienne soup                      |sopa juliana
lentil soup                        |sopa de lentejas
ox-tail soup                       |sopa de rabo de vaca
pea soup                           |sopa de guisantes
rice soup                          |sopa de arroz
turtle soup                        |sopa de tortuga
vegetable soup                     |sopa de menestras
vermicelli soup                    |sopa de fideos
broth                              |el caldo
beef                               |la carne de vaca
boiled beef                        |carne cocida
roast beef                         |carne asada, rosbif
stewed beef                        |carne estofada
beefsteak                          |el biftek
well-done                          |bien cocido
under-done                         |poco cocido
mutton                             |el carnero
a chop                             |una costilla
a cutlet                           |una chuleta
pork                               |la carne de puerco
bacon                              |el tocino
ham                                |el jamón
a sausage                          |una salchicha
sauce                              |la salsa
poultry                            |las aves, la pollería
a fowl                             |un ave
a chicken                          |un pollo, una gallina
a duck                             |un pato
a goose                            |un ganso
a pigeon                           |un pichón
a turkey                           |un pavo
game                               |la caza
a hare                             |una liebre
a partridge                        |una perdiz
a pheasant                         |un faisán
a rabbit                           |un conejo
venison                            |el venado
fish                               |el pescado
a carp                             |una carpa
a cod                              |un bacalao
a herring                          |un arenque
a mackerel                         |un escombro
a pike                             |un sollo
a salmon                           |un salmón
a sardine                          |una sardina
a sole                             |un lenguado
a trout                            |una trucha
a turbot                           |un rodaballo
a whiting                          |una pescadilla
oysters                            |las ostras
a crab                             |un cangrejo
a lobster                          |una langosta
vegetables                         |las legumbres
artichoke                          |la alcachofa
asparagus                          |el espárrago
beans                              |las habichuelas, las habas
cabbage                            |la col
carrots                            |las zanahorias
cauliflower                        |la coliflor
peas                               |los guisantes
potatoes                           |las patatas
sprouts                            |los repollos
turnips                            |los nabos
macaroni                           |los macarrones
a salad                            |una ensalada
celery                             |el apio
cresses                            |los berros
cucumber                           |el pepino
endive                             |la escarola
lettuce                            |la lechuga
oil                                |el aceite
onion                              |la cebolla
radish                             |el rábano
tomato                             |el tomate
vinegar                            |el vinagre
pepper                             |la pimienta
salt                               |la sal
mustard                            |la mostaza
pickles                            |los encurtidos
eggs                               |los huevos
boiled eggs                        |huevos cocidos, pasados por agua
fried eggs                         |huevos fritos, estrellados
poached eggs                       |huevos escalfados
scrambled eggs                     |huevos revueltos, revoltillo (de huevos)
an omelet                          |una tortilla
a pudding                          |un pudín
fruit                              |la fruta
an apple                           |una manzana
an apricot                         |un albaricoque
a cherry                           |una cereza
a greengage                        |una ciruela verdal
a melon                            |un melón
an orange                          |una naranja
a peach                            |un melocotón
a pear                             |una pera
a plum                             |una ciruela
a raspberry                        |una frambuesa
a strawberry                       |una fresa
biscuits                           |los bizcochos, las galletitas
cheese                             |el queso
a cup of coffee                    |una taza de café
a cup of tea                       |una taza de té
a cup of chocolate                 |una jícara de chocolate
milk                               |la leche
sugar                              |el azúcar
cream                              |la crema
a glass of beer                    |un vaso de cerveza
a glass of water                   |un vaso de agua
a bottle of wine                   |una botella de vino
a glass of wine                    |una copa (copita) de vino
red wine                           |el vino tinto
white wine                         |el vino blanco
cider                              |la sidra
lemonade                           |la limonada
liqueurs                           |los licores
an ice                             |un helado
                                   |
                                   |
_In the Street. Buildings._        |_En la Calle. Edificios._
                                   |
the street, road                   |la calle
an alley                           |una callejuela, un callejón
an arcade                          |una arcada
an avenue                          |una avenida
a boulevard                        |un bulevar
a court                            |un callejón
a courtyard                        |un patio
a lane                             |una callejuela
a passage                          |un pasadizo
a square                           |una plaza
the sidewalk, the footway          |la acera
the gutter                         |el arroyo
the carriageway                    |el adoquinado, el empedrado
the conveyance                     |el vehículo
a cab                              |un coche (de punto, de plaza)
the cabman                         |el cochero
the cab-stand                      |la parada de coches
a carriage                         |un carruaje
an omnibus, a 'bus                 |un ómnibus
the driver                         |el cochero
the guard, conductor               |el conductor
a seat                             |un asiento
inside                             |el interior
outside                            |la imperial
a taxi, a taxi-cab                 |un taxi (un taxímetro),
                                   |  un auto (un automóvil)
a tram, a tram-car                 |un tranvía, un coche de tranvía
the post                           |la posta
post-horses                        |los caballos de posta
to travel by post                  |ir en posta
the diligence                      |la diligencia
the mail                           |la mala, el correo
the post-office                    |el correo
a letter-box                       |un buzón
a house                            |una casa
a shop                             |una tienda
a church                           |una iglesia
a chapel                           |una capilla
a cathedral                        |una catedral
a hospital                         |un hospital
a poor-house                       |una casa de caridad
a prison                           |una cárcel
a school                           |una escuela
a college                          |un colegio
a university                       |una universidad
the town-hall                      |la casa del ayuntamiento,
                                   |  la casa consistorial
the exchange                       |la bolsa
a bank                             |un banco
an hotel                           |una fonda, un hotel
an inn                             |una posada
a restaurant                       |un restaurant
a café                             |un café
a public-house                     |una taberna
a theatre                          |un teatro
a music-hall                       |un teatro de variedades
a picture-gallery                  |una galería de pinturas
a museum                           |un museo
a library                          |una biblioteca
a market                           |un mercado
a palace                           |un palacio
a tower                            |una torre
a bridge                           |un puente
the mint                           |la casa-moneda
a lamp                             |un farol
a park                             |un parque
a garden                           |un jardín
a promenade                        |un paseo
a monument                         |un monumento
a fountain                         |una fuente
the wall                           |el muro, la pared
the walls of a town                |los muros (las murallas) de una ciudad
                                   |
                                   |
_Public Notices.                   |Avisos al Público._
                                   |
Apartments                         |Habitaciones
furnished                          |amuebladas
unfurnished                        |sin amueblar
Closed on Sundays                  |Se cierra los domingos
Danger                             |Peligro
Entrance                           |Entrada
Exit                               |Salida
Fire alarm                         |Señal de incendio
For sale                           |De venta
Hydrant                            |Boca de riego
Keep to the right.                 |Guardar la derecha
Keep to the left.                  |Guardar la izquierda
Letter-box                         |Buzón
No admittance                      |No se permite la entrada
No smoking allowed                 |Se prohibe fumar
No thoroughfare                    |Se prohibe el paso. No se pasa
Notice                             |Aviso
Please do not touch                |Sírvase no tocar
Private                            |Privado
Refreshments                       |Refrescos. Bebidas
Road closed                        |Calle cerrada
Stick no bills                     |Se prohibe fijar carteles
To let                             |Se alquila
Way in                             |Entrada
Way out                            |Salida
Wet paint                          |Pintado. Recién pintado
                                   |
                                   |
_Parts of a House._                |_Partes de una Casa._
                                   |
a dwelling                         |a habitación, una casa
the walls                          |las paredes
a partition wall                   |un tabique
the door                           |la puerta
the front door                     |la puerta de entrada
the back door                      |la puerta trasera
a lock                             |una cerradura
a key                              |una llave
a latchkey                         |un llavín
a bolt                             |un cerrojo
a latch                            |un picaporte
the hall                           |el vestíbulo
the staircase                      |la escalera
the stairs                         |los escalones
the balustrade                     |la baranda, el pasamanos
the landing                        |el descanso
a room                             |un cuarto, una habitación, una pieza
a bath-room                        |un cuarto de baño
a bed-room                         |una alcoba, un dormitorio
a dining-room                      |un comedor
a drawing-room                     |una sala de recibo,
                                   |un recibimiento
a dressing-room                    |un tocador
a sitting-room                     |una sala, un gabinete
a smoking-room                     |un cuarto de fumar
a cellar                           |un sótano
a garret                           |una guardilla, una
                                   |buhardilla
a kitchen                          |una cocina
a library                          |una librería
a study                            |un estudio
the water-closet (w.c.)            |el excusado (el número
ciento)                            |
the windows                        |las ventanas
a balcony                          |un balcón
the blinds                         |las persianas, las
celosías                           |
the floor                          |el piso, el suelo
first floor                        |el primer piso
the ceiling                        |el techo
the fire-grate                     |la reja, el fogón
the hearth                         |el hogar
the chimney                        |la chimenea
the roof                           |el tejado
the gable                          |el alero
                                   |
                                   |
_Furniture and_                    |_Muebles y Utensilios._
_Utensils._                        |
                                   |
a table                            |una mesa
a dining table                     |una mesa de comedor
a work-table                       |una mesita de labores
a writing-table                    |una mesa de escribir
a chair                            |una silla
an arm-chair                       |un sillón de brazos
an easy-chair                      |un sillón, una butaca
a rocking-chair                    |una mecedora
a sofa                             |un sofá
a piano                            |un piano
pictures                           |los cuadros
a mirror                           |un espejo
a clock                            |un reloj
a vase                             |un jarrón
a book-case                        |una librería
a desk                             |un pupitre
carpets                            |las alfombras
curtains                           |las cortinas
rugs                               |las alcatifas
a door-mat                         |una estera
a screen                           |una pantalla
a coal-box                         |un cubo de carbón
a fender                           |un guardafuegos
a poker                            |un atizador
tongs                              |las tenazas
a shovel                           |una pala, una badila
a bed                              |una cama
bedding                            |a ropa de cama
a blanket                          |una manta
a bolster                          |un travesero, un almohadón
a counterpane                      |una colcha
a coverlet                         |un cobertor
a feather-bed                      |un colchón de plumas, un plumón
a mattress                         |un colchón
a spring-mattress                  |un colchón de muelles
a pillow                           |una almohada
a pillow-case                      |una funda (de almohada)
a sheet                            |una sábana
a wardrobe                         |un guardarropa, un armario
a chest of drawers                 |una cómoda
a dressing-table                   |un tocador
a wash-stand                       |up lavabo, un palanganero
a basin                            |una palangana
a ewer                             |una jofaina
a soap-tray                        |una jabonera
soap                               |el jabón
towels                             |las toallas
electric light                     |la luz eléctrica
gas                                |el gas
a lamp                             |una lámpara
a candle                           |una vela
a candle-stick                     |un candelero
a bell                             |una campanilla
an electric bell                   |un timbre eléctrico
a trunk                            |un baúl
a portmanteau                      |una maleta
a box                              |una caja
                                   |
                                   |
_Table Utensils._                  |_Servicio de Mesa._
                                   |
the dining-table                   |la mesa de comedor
tablecloth                         |el mantel
napkin, serviette                  |la servilleta
a dish                             |una fuente
a plate                            |un plato
a knife                            |un cuchillo
a fork                             |un tenedor
a spoon                            |una cuchara
a tea-spoon                        |una cucharita
a glass                            |un vaso
a water-bottle                     |una botella para agua
a wine-bottle                      |una botella para vino
a jug                              |un jarro
the cruet-stand                    |las vinagreras
a cruet                            |una ampolleta, un pomo
salt                               |la sal
salt-cellar                        |el salero
pepper                             |la pimienta
pepper-caster                      |la pimentera
vinegar                            |el vinagre
vinegar-bottle                     |la vinagrera
oil                                |el aceite
oil-bottle                         |la aceitera
mustard                            |la mostaza
mustard-pot                        |la mostacera
sauce                              |la salsa
sauce-boat                         |la salsera
tea                                |el té
tea-pot                            |la tetera
cup                                |la taza
saucer                             |el platillo
a cup of tea                       |una taza de té
coffee                             |el café
coffee-pot                         |la cafetera
a cup of coffee                    |una taza de café
milk                               |la leche
milk-jug                           |el jarro de la leche
sugar                              |el azúcar
sugar-basin                        |el azucarero
sugar-tongs                        |las tenacillas
a toothpick                        |un mondadientes, un palillo
                                   |
                                   |
_Domestic Animals._                |_Animales Domésticos._
                                   |
the ass                            |el asno, el burro
the bull                           |el toro
the bullock                        |el buey
the calf                           |la ternera
the cat                            |el gato
the colt                           |el potro
the cow                            |la vaca
the dog                            |el perro
the ewe                            |la oveja
the goat                           |la cabra
the horse                          |el caballo
the lamb                           |el cordero
the mare                           |la yegua
the mouse                          |el ratón
the mule                           |la mula
the ox                             |el buey
the pig                            |el puerco
the ram                            |el morueco
the rat                            |la rata
the sheep                          |el carnero
the sow                            |la puerca
                                   |
                                   |
_Wild Animals._                    |_Animales Silvestres._
                                   |
the badger                         |el tejón
the bear                           |el oso
the beaver                         |el castor
the boar                           |el jabalí
the buffalo                        |el búfalo
the camel                          |el camello
the deer                           |el corzo
the dromedary                      |el dromedario
the elephant                       |el elefante
the ferret                         |el hurón
the fox                            |el zorro
the giraffe                        |la girafa
the hare                           |la liebre
the hedgehog                       |el erizo
the hyena                          |la hiena
the jackal                         |el chacal
the leopard                        |el leopardo
the lion                           |el león
the lioness                        |la leona
the mole                           |el topo
the monkey                         |el mono
the otter                          |la nutria
the panther                        |la pantera
the porcupine                      |el puerco espín
the rabbit                         |el conejo
the rhinoceros                     |el rinoceronte
the seal                           |la foca
the serpent                        |la serpiente
the squirrel                       |la ardilla
the stag                           |el ciervo
the tiger                          |el tigre
the tigress                        |la tigre
the weasel                         |la comadreja
the wolf                           |el lobo
the zebra                          |la cebra
                                   |
                                   |
_Birds._                           |_Aves._
                                   |
the bat                            |el murciélago
the blackbird                      |el mirlo
the canary                         |el canario
the cock                           |el gallo
the crane                          |la grulla
the crow                           |el cuervo
the cuckoo                         |el cuco
the dove                           |la paloma
the duck                           |el pato
the eagle                          |el águila
the eaglet                         |el aguilucho
the falcon                         |el halcón
the finch                          |el pinzón
the goose                          |el ganso
the grouse                         |el gallo silvestre
the hawk                           |el gavilán
the hen                            |la gallina
the heron                          |la garza
the jackdaw                        |el grajo
the lark                           |la alondra
the linnet                         |el jilguero
the magpie                         |la urraca
the nightingale                    |el ruiseñor
the ostrich                        |el avestruz
the owl                            |el búho
the parrot                         |el loro
the partridge                      |la perdiz
the peacock                        |el pavo real
the pheasant                       |el faisán
the pigeon                         |la paloma
the quail                          |la codorniz
the raven                          |el cuervo
the robin                          |el petirrojo
the sea-gull                       |la gaviota
the snipe                          |la agachadiza
the sparrow                        |el gorrión
the starling                       |el estornino
the stork                          |la cigüeña
the swallow                        |la golondrina
the swan                           |el cisne
the thrush                         |el tordo
the tomtit                         |el paro
the turkey                         |el pavo
the vulture                        |el buitre
the woodcock                       |la chocha
the wren                           |el reyezuelo
                                   |
                                   |
_Fishes._                          |_Peces._
                                   |
the anchovy                        |la anchoa
the bream                          |el sargo
the brill                          |el mero
the carp                           |la carpa
the cockle                         |la coquina
the cod                            |el bacalao
the conger-eel                     |el congrio
the crab                           |el cangrejo
the cuttle-fish                    |el calamar
the dab                            |la barbada
the eel                            |la anguila
the gudgeon                        |el gobio
the haddock                        |la merlucilla
the hake                           |la merluza
the halibut                        |el hipogloso
the herring                        |el arenque
the lobster                        |la langosta
the mackerel                       |el escombro
the mullet                         |el múgil
the mussel                         |la almeja
the oyster                         |la ostra
the perch                          |la perca
the periwinkle                     |el caracol de mar
the pike                           |el sollo
the pilchard                       |la sardina
the plaice                         |la platija
the prawn                          |el langostín
the roach                          |el escarcho
the salmon                         |el salmón
the sardine                        |la sardina
the shad                           |el sábalo
the shark                          |el tiburón
the shrimp                         |el camarón
the skate                          |la lija
the sole                           |el lenguado
the sprat                          |la sardineta
the sturgeon                       |el esturión
the tench                          |la tenca
the trout                          |la trucha
the tunny                          |el atún
the turbot                         |el rodaballo
the whale                          |la ballena
the whiting                        |la pescadilla
                                   |
                                   |
_Insects and Reptiles._            |_Insectos y Reptiles._
                                   |
the adder                          |la víbora
the alligator                      |el caimán
the ant                            |la hormiga
the bee                            |la abeja
the beetle                         |el escarabajo
the boa                            |la boa
the bug                            |la chinche
the butterfly                      |la mariposa
the caterpillar                    |la oruga
the centipede                      |el ciempies
the cockroach                      |la cucaracha
the cricket                        |el grillo
the crocodile                      |el cocodrilo
the earwig                         |la tijereta
the flea                           |la pulga
the fly                            |la mosca
the frog                           |la rana
the gnat                           |el mosquito
the grasshopper                    |el saltamontes
the hornet                         |el avispón
the lizard                         |el lagarto
the locust                         |la langosta
the louse                          |el piojo
the mosquito                       |el mosquito
the moth                           |la polilla
the serpent                        |la serpiente
the snail                          |el caracol
the snake                          |la culebra
the spider                         |la araña
the tadpole                        |el renacuajo
the toad                           |el sapo
the tortoise                       |la tortuga
the viper                          |la víbora
the wasp                           |la avispa
the weevil                         |el gorgojo
the worm                           |el gusano
                                   |
                                   |
_Flowers._                         |_Flores._
                                   |
the anemone                        |la anémona
the aster                          |el áster
the blue-bell                      |la campanilla azul
the buttercup                      |el botón de oro
the camellia                       |la camelia
the carnation                      |el clavel
the chrysanthemum                  |el crisantemo
the cornflower                     |el azulejo
the crocus                         |el azafrán
the daffodil                       |el narciso
the dahlia                         |la dalia
the daisy                          |la margarita
the forget-me-not                  |el nomeolvides
the foxglove                       |la dedalera
the geranium                       |el geranio
the gillyflower                    |el alelí
the heart's-ease                   |el pensamiento
the heliotrope                     |el heliotropo
the hollyhock                      |la malva hortense
the honeysuckle                    |la madreselva
the hyacinth                       |el jacinto
the jasmine, jessamine             |el jazmín
the lilac                          |la lila
the lily                           |el lirio
the lily of the valley             |el lirio del valle
the marigold                       |la maravilla
the mignonette                     |la reseda
the narcissus                      |el narciso
the nasturtium                     |la capuchina
the pansy                          |el pensamiento
the passion-flower                 |la pasionaria
the pink                           |el clavel
the poppy                          |la amapola
the primrose                       |la primavera
the rhododendron                   |el rododendro
the rose                           |la rosa
the snowdrop                       |la campanilla blanca
the sunflower                      |el girasol
the sweet-pea                      |el guisante de olor
the tulip                          |el tulipán
the violet                         |la violeta
the wall-flower                    |el alelí
                                   |
                                   |
_Fruits, Trees,                    |_Frutas, Arboles,
Vegetables, etc._                  |Legumbres, etc._
                                   |
the acorn                          |la bellota
the alder                          |el aliso
the almond                         |la almendra
the almond-tree                    |el almendro
the apple                          |la manzana
the apple-tree                     |el manzano
the apricot                        |el albaricoque
the apricot-tree                   |el albaricoquero
the artichoke                      |la alcachofa
the ash                            |el fresno
the asparagus                      |el espárrago
the aspen                          |el temblón
the banana                         |la banana, el plátano
the barley                         |la cebada
the bean                           |la habichuela, el haba
the beech                          |el haya
the beet(root)                     |la remolacha
the birch                          |el abedul
the blackberry                     |la zarzamora
the blackberry-bush                |la zarza
the broccoli                       |el bróculi
the cabbage                        |la col
the carrot                         |la zanahoria
the cauliflower                    |la coliflor
the cedar                          |el cedro
the celery                         |el apio
the cherry                         |la cereza
the cherry-tree                    |el cerezo
the chestnut                       |la castaña
the chestnut-tree                  |el castaño
the citron                         |la cidra
the citron-tree                    |el cidro
the cocoanut                       |el coco
the cocoanut-tree                  |el cocotero
the cucumber                       |el pepino
the cumin                          |el comino
the currant                        |la grosella
the currant-bush                   |el grosellero
the date                           |el dátil
the date-palm                      |la palmera
the elderberry                     |la baya del saúco
the elderberry-tree                |el saúco
the elm                            |el olmo
the endive                         |la escarola
the fig                            |el higo
the fig-tree                       |la higuera
the filbert                        |la avellana
the filbert-tree                   |el avellano
the fir                            |el abeto
the garlic                         |el ajo
the gooseberry                     |la uva espina
the gooseberry-bush                |la uva espina
the grape                          |la uva
the grape-vine                     |la cepa
the greengage                      |la ciruela verdal
the greengage-tree                 |el ciruelo verdal
the larch                          |el alerce
the laurel                         |el laurel
the leek                           |el puerro
the lentil                         |la lenteja
the lemon                          |el limón
the lemon-tree                     |el limonero
the lettuce                        |la lechuga
the maize                          |el maíz
the maple                          |el arce
the medlar                         |la níspola
the medlar-tree                    |el níspero
the melon                          |el melón
the millet                         |el mijo
the mint                           |la menta
the mulberry                       |la mora
the mulberry-tree                  |el moral
the mushroom                       |la seta
the nut                            |la nuez
the nut-tree                       |el nogal
the nutmeg                         |la nuez moscada
the nutmeg-tree                    |la mirística
the oak                            |el roble
the oat                            |la avena
the olive                          |la aceituna
the olive-tree                     |el olivo
the onion                          |la cebolla
the orange                         |la naranja
the orange-tree                    |el naranjo
the parsley                        |el perejil
the parsnip                        |la chirivía
the pea                            |el guisante
the peach                          |el melocotón
the peach-tree                     |el melocotonero
the pear                           |la pera
the pear-tree                      |el peral
the pine-apple                     |la piña, la anana
the pine(-tree)                    |el pino
the plum                           |la ciruela
the plum-tree                      |el ciruelo
the pomegranate                    |la granada
the pomegranate-tree               |el granado
the poplar                         |el álamo
the potato                         |la patata
the quince                         |el membrillo
the quince-tree                    |el membrillero
the radish                         |el rábano
the raspberry                      |la frambuesa
the raspberry-bush                 |el frambueso
the rhubarb                        |el ruibarbo
the rice                           |el arroz
the rye                            |el centeno
the sage                           |la salvia
the sprouts (Brussels)             |los repollos (de Bruselas)
the strawberry                     |la fresa
the strawberry-plant               |el fresal
the tomato                         |el tomate
the tomato-plant                   |la tomatera
the turnip                         |el nabo
the vegetable-marrow               |la médula vegetal
the walnut                         |la nuez
the walnut-tree                    |el nogal
the water-cress                    |el berro
the wheat                          |el trigo
the willow                         |el sauce
the yew                            |el tejo
a tree                             |un árbol
a shrub                            |un arbusto
a thicket                          |un matorral
the wood                           |el bosque
timber                             |la madera
                                   |
                                   |
_Metals and Minerals._             |_Metales y Minerales._
                                   |
the alabaster                      |el alabastro
the alloy                          |la liga, la aleación
the alum                           |el alumbre
the aluminium                      |el aluminio
an amethyst                        |una amatista
the arsenic                        |el arsénico
the asphalt                        |el asfalto
the bismuth                        |el bismuto
the bitumen                        |el betún
the brass                          |el latón
the bronze                         |el bronce
the chalk                          |la greda
the clay                           |la arcilla
the coal                           |el carbón
the cobalt                         |el cobalto
the copper                         |el cobre
the copperas                       |la caparrosa
the crystal                        |el cristal
a diamond                          |un diamante
an emerald                         |una esmeralda
the enamel                         |el esmalte
the feldspar                       |el feldespato
the flint                          |el pedernal
a garnet                           |un granate
the glass                          |el vidrio
the gold                           |el oro
the granite                        |el granito
the iron                           |el hierro
cast-iron                          |el hierro fundido
pig-iron                           |el hierro en lingotes
sheet-iron                         |el hierro en planchas
wrought-iron                       |el hierro forjado
the jet                            |el azabache
the lead                           |el plomo
black-lead                         |el lápiz-plomo, el grafito, la plombajina
red-lead                           |el minio, el azarcón
white-lead                         |el albayalde
the lime                           |la cal
the marble                         |el mármol
the mercury                        |el mercurio
the ochre                          |el ocre
an opal                            |un ópalo
the platinum                       |el platino
the porphyry                       |el pórfido
the quartz                         |el cuarzo
the quicksilver                    |el azogue
a ruby                             |un rubí
the saltpetre                      |el salitre
a sapphire                         |un zafiro
the schist                         |el esquisto
the silver                         |la plata
the slate                          |la pizarra
the steel                          |el acero
the stone                          |la piedra
loadstone                          |el imán
sandstone                          |el asperón
the tin                            |el estaño
tin-plate                          |la hojalata, la hoja de lata
a topaz                            |un topacio
a turquoise                        |una turquesa
the verdigris                      |el cardenillo
the vermilion                      |el bermellón
the zinc                           |el zinc
                                   |
                                   |
_Tools, Machinery, etc._           |_Herramientas, Maquinaria, etc._
                                   |
an adze                            |una azuela
an anvil                           |un yunque
an auger                           |una barrena
an awl                             |una lesna
an axe                             |un hacha
the boiler                         |la caldera
a chisel                           |un cincel, un escoplo
the crane                          |la grúa
the cylinder                       |el cilindro
a drill                            |un taladro
the engine                         |la máquina
a steam-engine                     |una maquina de vapor
a file                             |una lima
the forge                          |la fragua
the furnace                        |el horno
a gimlet                           |una barrena
a hammer                           |un martillo
a hatchet                          |una hachuela
a knife                            |un cuchillo
the lathe                          |el torno
the machine                        |la máquina
a sewing-machine                   |una máquina de coser
the machinery                      |la maquinaria
mining machinery                   |la maquinaria para minas
a nail                             |un clavo
a plane                            |un cepillo
the pump                           |la bomba
a rivet                            |un remache
a saw                              |una sierra
the scissors                       |las tijeras
a shovel                           |una pala
a spade                            |una azada
the tongs                          |las tenazas
a tube                             |un tubo
a turbine                          |una turbina
a valve                            |una válvula
a vice                             |un torno
the wheel                          |la rueda
a water-wheel                      |una turbina, una rueda hidráulica
the wire                           |el alambre
iron wire                          |el alambre de hierro
steel wire                         |el alambre de acero
a wrench                           |una llave inglesa
                                   |
                                   |
_Numbers (cardinal)._              |_Números cardinales._
one                                |uno, una
two                                |dos
three                              |tres
four                               |cuatro
five                               |cinco
six                                |seis
seven                              |siete
eight                              |ocho
nine                               |nueve
ten                                |diez
eleven                             |once
twelve                             |doce
thirteen                           |trece
fourteen                           |catorce
fifteen                            |quince
sixteen                            |diez y seis (dieciseis)
seventeen                          |diez y siete (diecisiete)
eighteen                           |diez y ocho (dieciocho)
nineteen                           |diez y nueve (diecinueve)
twenty                             |veinte
twenty-one                         |veinte y uno (veintiuno)
twenty-two                         |veinte y dos (veintidós)
twenty-three                       |veinte y tres (veintitrés)
twenty-four                        |veinte y cuatro (veinticuatro)
thirty                             |treinta
thirty-one                         |treinta y uno
thirty-two                         |treinta y dos
forty                              |cuarenta
fifty                              |cincuenta
sixty                              |sesenta
seventy                            |setenta
eighty                             |ochenta
ninety                             |noventa
a hundred                          |ciento[8]
a hundred and one                  |ciento uno
a hundred and two                  |ciento dos
a hundred and eleven               |ciento once
a hundred and twenty-one           |ciento veintiuno
two hundred                        |doscientos-as
two hundred and one                |doscientos uno
three hundred                      |trescientos-as
four hundred                       |cuatrocientos-as
five hundred                       |quinientos-as
six hundred                        |seiscientos-as
seven hundred                      |setecientos-as
eight hundred                      |ochocientos-as
nine hundred                       |novecientos-as
a thousand                         |mil
a thousand and one                 |mil y uno
a thousand and ten                 |mil y diez
two thousand                       |dos mil
three thousand                     |tres mil
four thousand                      |cuatro mil
five thousand, etc.                |cinco mil, etc.
ten thousand                       |diez mil
a hundred thousand                 |cien mil
a million                          |un millón
                                   |
                                   |
                                   |
_Numbers (ordinal)._               |_Números ordinales._
                                   |
the first                          |el primero,[9] la primera
the second                         |el segundo, la segunda
the third                          |el tercero
the fourth                         |el cuarto
the fifth                          |el quinto
the sixth                          |el sexto
the seventh                        |el séptimo or sétimo
the eighth                         |el octavo
the ninth                          |el noveno or nono
the tenth                          |el décimo
the eleventh                       |el undécimo
the twelfth                        |el duodécimo
the thirteenth                     |el décimotercio
the fourteenth                     |el décimocuarto
the fifteenth                      |el décimoquinto
the sixteenth                      |el décimosexto
the seventeenth                    |el décimoséptimo
the eighteenth                     |el décimoctavo
the nineteenth                     |el décimonono
the twentieth                      |el vigésimo
the twenty-first                   |el vigésimo primero
the twenty-second                  |el vigésimo segundo
the thirtieth                      |el trigésimo
the fortieth                       |el cuadragésimo
the fiftieth                       |el quincuagésimo
the sixtieth                       |el sexagésimo
the seventieth                     |el septuagésimo
the eightieth                      |el octogésimo
the ninetieth                      |el nonagésimo
the hundredth                      |el centésimo
the hundred and first              |el centésimo primero
the hundred and second             |el centésimo segundo
the two hundredth                  |el ducentésimo
the three hundredth                |el tricentésimo
the four hundredth                 |el cuadringentésimo
the five hundredth                 |el quingentésimo
the six hundredth                  |el sexcentésimo
the seven hundredth                |el septingentésimo
the eight hundredth                |el octingentésimo
the nine hundredth                 |el noningentésimo
the thousandth                     |el milésimo
the two thousandth                 |el dosmilésimo
the three thousandth               |el tresmilésimo
the millionth                      |el millonésimo
the last                           |el último, el postrero
the last but one                   |el penúltimo
                                   |
                                   |
_Fractions._                       |_Fracciones._
                                   |
a half                             |una mitad
a third                            |un tercio
two-thirds                         |dos tercios
a fourth                           |un cuarto
three-fourths                      |tres cuartos
a fifth                            |un quinto
four-fifths                        |cuatro quintos
a sixth                            |un sexto
five-sixths                        |cinco sextos
a seventh                          |un séptimo
an eighth                          |un octavo
a ninth                            |un noveno
a tenth                            |un décimo
an eleventh                        |un onzavo
a twelfth                          |un dozavo
a twentieth                        |un veintavo
three-twentieths                   |tres veintavos
a hundredth                        |un centésimo
                                   |
                                   |
_Multiples and Collectives._       |_Multíplices y Colectivos._
                                   |
single                             |sencillo
double                             |doble
treble                             |triple
fourfold                           |cuádruplo
fivefold                           |quíntuplo
sixfold                            |séxtuplo
sevenfold                          |séptuplo
eightfold                          |óctuplo
ninefold                           |nónuplo
tenfold                            |décuplo
hundredfold                        |céntuplo
thousandfold                       |mílcuplo
once                               |una vez
twice                              |dos veces
thrice, three times                |tres veces
four times                         |cuatro veces
ten times                          |diez veces
a hundred times                    |cien veces
ten times three are thirty         |diez veces tres hacen treinta
a couple                           |un par
a dozen                            |una docena
half a dozen                       |media docena
a dozen and a half                 |docena y media
a score                            |una veintena
half a score                       |una decena
a score and a half                 |una treintena
a hundred                          |un centenar
a gross                            |una gruesa
                                   |
                                   |
_The Earth._                       |_La Tierra._
                                   |
geography                          |la geografía
atmosphere                         |la atmósfera
land                               |la tierra
sea                                |el mar
a continent                        |un continente
the coast                          |la costa
an island                          |una isla
an islet                           |un islote
a peninsula                        |una península
a cape                             |un cabo
a promontory                       |un promontorio
a reef                             |un arrecife
a mountain                         |una montaña
a mountain-chain                   |una cordillera
a volcano                          |un volcán
a hill                             |una colina
a rock                             |una roca
a ravine                           |una barranca
a waterfall                        |una cascada
a valley                           |un valle
a strait                           |un estrecho
an isthmus                         |un istmo
a channel                          |un canal
a river                            |un río
the bank                           |la orilla, la ribera
a sandbank                         |un banco de arena
an estuary                         |un estuario
a gulf                             |un golfo
a bay                              |una bahía
a port, harbour                    |un puerto
a breakwater                       |un rompeolas
the current                        |la corriente
the waves                          |las olas, las ondas
a canal                            |un canal
a stream                           |una corriente
a brook                            |un arroyo
a source, spring                   |un manantial
a lake                             |un lago
a well                             |un pozo
the equator                        |el ecuador
the poles                          |los polos
a meridian                         |un meridiano
latitude                           |la latitud
longitude                          |la longitud
the frigid zone                    |la zona glacial
the temperate zone                 |la zona templada
the torrid zone                    |la zona tórrida
the tropics                        |los trópicos
north                              |el norte
south                              |el sur
east                               |el este
west                               |el oeste
the horizon                        |el horizonte
                                   |
                                   |
_The Sky and Air._                 |_El Cielo y el Aire._
                                   |
the world                          |el mundo
the sky                            |el cielo
the stars                          |las estrellas, los astros
the planets                        |los planetas
a comet                            |un cometa
the sun                            |el sol
sunrise                            |la salida del sol
sunset                             |la puesta del sol
it is sunny                        |hace sol
the moon                           |la luna
full moon                          |la luna llena
new moon                           |la luna nueva
first quarter                      |el cuarto creciente
last quarter                       |el cuarto menguante
it is moonlight                    |hace luna
the clouds                         |las nubes
it is cloudy                       |está nublado
the wind                           |el viento
it is windy                        |hace viento
the storm                          |la tempestad
it is stormy                       |está tempestuoso
the rain                           |la lluvia
it rains                           |llueve
the snow                           |la nieve
it snows                           |nieva
the frost                          |la helada
the ice                            |el hielo
it freezes                         |hiela
the fog                            |la niebla
it is foggy                        |hace niebla
the lightning                      |el relámpago
it lightens                        |relampaguea
the thunder                        |el trueno
it thunders                        |truena
the cold                           |el frío
it is cold                         |hace frío
the heat, warmth                   |el calor
it is warm                         |hace calor
the weather                        |el tiempo
it is fine weather                 |hace buen tiempo
it is bad weather                  |hace mal tiempo
the temperature                    |la temperatura
the climate                        |el clima
a rainbow                          |un arco iris
an eclipse                         |un eclipse
dawn                               |el alba
twilight                           |el crepúsculo
                                   |
                                   |
_Countries and Nations._           |_Países y Pueblos._
                                   |
the five parts of the world        |las cinco partes del mundo
Europe                             |Europa
a European                         |un Europeo[10]
European                           |europeo,-ea
Asia                               |Asia
an Asiatic                         |un Asiático
Asiatic                            |asiático,-ca
Africa                             |Africa
an African                         |un Africano
African                            |africano,-na
America                            |América
an American                        |un Americano
American                           |americano,-na
Australia                          |Australia
an Australian                      |un Australiano
Australian                         |australiano,-na
Great Britain                      |Gran Bretaña
a Briton                           |un Britano
British                            |británico,-ca
England                            |Inglaterra
an Englishman                      |un Inglés
English                            |inglés,-esa
Scotland                           |Escocia
a Scotsman                         |un Escocés
Scottish                           |escocés,-esa
Ireland                            |Irlanda
an Irishman                        |un Irlandés
Irish                              |irlandés,-esa
Wales                              |Gales, el País de Gales
a Welshman                         |un Galés
Welsh                              |galés, -esa
Abyssinia                          |Abisinia
an Abyssinian                      |un Abisinio
Abyssinian                         |abisinio,-ia
Algeria                            |Argelia
an Algerian                        |un Argelino
Algerian                           |argelino,-na
Alsace                             |Alsacia
an Alsatian                        |un Alsaciano
Alsatian                           |alsaciano,-na
Andalusia                          |Andalucía
an Andalusian                      |un Andaluz
Andalusian                         |andaluz,-za
Arabia                             |Arabia
an Arab                            |un Arabe
Arab, Arabian, Arabic              |árabe; arábigo,-ga
Argentine (Republic)               |Argentina (La República)
an Argentine                       |un Argentino
Argentine                          |argentino,-na
Armenia                            |Armenia
an Armenian                        |un Armenio
Armenian                           |armenio,-ia
Arragon                            |Aragón
an Arragonese                      |un Aragonés
Arragonese                         |aragonés,-esa
Assyria                            |Asiria
an Assyrian                        |un Asirio
Assyrian                           |asirio,-ia
Austria                            |Austria
an Austrian                        |un Austríaco
Austrian                           |austríaco,-ca
Bavaria                            |Baviera
a Bavarian                         |un Bávaro
Bavarian                           |bávaro,-ra
Belgium                            |Bélgica
a Belgian                          |un Belga
Belgian                            |belga
Bohemia                            |Bohemia
a Bohemian                         |un Bohemo
Bohemian                           |bohémico,-ca
Bolivia                            |Bolivia
a Bolivian                         |un Boliviano
Bolivian                           |boliviano,-na
Bosnia                             |Bosnia
a Bosnian                          |un Bosnio
Bosnian                            |bosnio,-ia
Brazil                             |Brasil (El)
a Brazilian                        |un Brasileño
Brazilian                          |brasileño,-ña
Brittany                           |Bretaña
a Breton                           |un Bretón
Breton                             |bretón,-ona
Bulgaria                           |Bulgaria
a Bulgarian                        |un Búlgaro
Bulgarian                          |búlgaro,-ra
Burgundy                           |Borgoña
a Burgundian                       |un Borgoñón
Burgundian                         |borgoñón,-ona
California                         |California
a Californian                      |un Californio
Californian                        |califórnico,-ca
Canada                             |Canadá (El)
a Canadian                         |un Canadiense
Canadian                           |canadiense
Cape of Good Hope (The)            |Cabo de Buena Esperanza (El)
Castile                            |Castilla
a Castilian                        |un Castellano
Castilian                          |castellano,-na
Catalonia                          |Cataluña
a Catalonian                       |un Catalán
Catalonian                         |catalán,-ana
Chili                              |Chile
a Chilian                          |un Chileno
Chilian                            |chileno,-na
China                              |China
a Chinaman                         |un Chino
Chinese                            |chino-na; chinesco,-ca
Colombia                           |Colombia
a Colombian                        |un Colombiano
Colombian                          |colombiano,-na
Denmark                            |Dinamarca
a Dane                             |un Dinamarqués
Danish                             |dinamarqués,-esa
Ecuador                            |Ecuador
an Ecuadorian                      |un Ecuatoriano
Ecuadorian                         |ecuatoriano,-na
Egypt                              |Egipto
an Egyptian                        |un Egipcio
Egyptian                           |egipcio,-ia
Finland                            |Finlandia
a Finn, Finlander                  |un Finlandés
Finnish                            |finlandés,-esa
Flanders                           |Flandes
a Fleming                          |un Flamenco
Flemish                            |flamenco,-ca
France                             |Francia
a Frenchman                        |un Francés
French                             |francés,-esa
Germany                            |Alemania
a German                           |un Alemán
German                             |alemán,-ana
Greece                             |Grecia
a Greek                            |un Griego
Greek                              |griego,-ga
Greenland                          |Groenlandia
a Greenlander                      |un Groenlandés
Greenlandic                        |groenlandés,-esa
Hanover                            |Hanóver
a Hanoverian                       |un Hanoveriano
Hanoverian                         |hanoveriano,-na
Holland                            |Holanda
a Dutchman                         |un Holandés
Dutch                              |holandés,-esa
Holy Land (The)                    |Tierra Santa (La)
Hungary                            |Hungría
a Hungarian                        |un Húngaro
Hungarian                          |húngaro,-ra
Iceland                            |Islandia
an Icelander                       |un Islandés
Icelandic                          |islandés,-esa
India                              |India
East India (Indies)                |Las Indias Orientales
West India (Indies)                |Las Indias Occidentales
an Indian                          |un Indio
Indian                             |indio,-ia
Italy                              |Italia
an Italian                         |un Italiano
Italian                            |italiano,-na
Japan                              |Japón (El)
a Japanese                         |un Japonés
Japanese                           |japonés,-esa
Jutland                            |Jutlandia
a Jutlander                        |un Jutlandés
Jutlandish                         |jutlandés,-esa
Lapland                            |Laponia
a Laplander                        |un Lapón
Laplandish                         |lapón,-na
Levant (The)                       |Levante (El)
a Levantine                        |un Levantino
Levantine                          |levantino,-na
Lombardy                           |Lombardía
a Lombard                          |un Lombardo
Lombardic                          |lombardo,-da
Lorraine                           |Lorena
a Lorrainer                        |un Lorenés
Lorrainese                         |lorenés,-esa
Mexico                             |Méjico
a Mexican                          |un Mejicano
Mexican                            |mejicano,-na
Moldavia                           |Moldavia
a Moldavian                        |un Moldavo
Moldavian                          |moldavo,-va
Moravia                            |Moravia
a Moravian                         |un Moravo
Moravian                           |moravo,-va
Morocco                            |Marruecos
a Moroccan                         |un Marroquí(n)
Moroccan                           |marroquí(n),-ina
Netherlands (The)                  |Países Bajos (Los)
a Netherlander                     |un Neerlandés
Netherlandish                      |neerlandés,-esa
New South Wales                    |Nueva Gales del Sur
New Zealand                        |Nueva Zelandia
a New Zealander                    |un Neozelandés
New Zealandian                     |neozelandés,-esa
Normandy                           |Normandia
a Norman                           |un Normando
Norman                             |normando,-da
North America                      |América del Norte
a North American                   |un Norteamericano
North American                     |norteamericano,-na
Norway                             |Noruego
a Norwegian                        |un Noruego
Norwegian                          |noruego,-ga
Paraguay                           |Paraguay (El)
a Paraguayan                       |un Paraguayano
Paraguayan                         |paraguayano,-na
Persia                             |Persia
a Persian                          |un Persa
Persian                            |persa
Peru                               |Perú (El)
a Peruvian                         |un Peruano
Peruvian                           |peruano,-na
Poland                             |Polonia
a Pole                             |un Polaco
Polish                             |polaco,-ca
Portugal                           |Portugal
a Portuguese                       |un Portugués
Portuguese                         |portugués,-esa
Prussia                            |Prusia
a Prussian                         |un Prusiano
Prussian                           |prusiano,-na
Roumania                           |Rumanía
a Roumanian                        |un Rumano
Roumanian                          |rumano,-na
Russia                             |Rusia
a Russian                          |un Ruso
Russian                            |ruso,-sa
Savoy                              |Saboya
a Savoyard                         |un Saboyano
Savoyard                           |saboyano,-na
Saxony                             |Sajonia
a Saxon                            |un Sajón
Saxon                              |sajón,-ona
Scandinavia                        |Escandinavia
a Scandinavian                     |un Escandinavo
Scandinavian                       |escandinavo,-va
Servia                             |Servia
a Servian                          |un Servio
Servian                            |servio,-ia
South America                      |América del Sur
a South American                   |un Sudamericano
South American                     |sudamericano,-na
Spain                              |España
a Spaniard                         |un Español
Spanish                            |español,-la
Sweden                             |Suecia
a Swede                            |un Sueco
Swedish                            |sueco,-ca
Switzerland                        |Suiza
a Swiss                            |un Suizo
Swiss                              |suizo,-za
Thessaly                           |Tesalia
a Thessalian                       |un Tesálico
Thessalian                         |tesálico,-ca
Tunis                              |Túnez
a Tunisian                         |un Tunecino
Tunisian                           |tunecino,-na
Turkey                             |Turquía
a Turk                             |un Turco
Turkish                            |turco,-ca
Tuscany                            |Toscana
a Tuscan                           |un Toscano
Tuscan                             |toscano,-na
United Kingdom (The)               |Reino Unido (El)
United States (The)                |Estados Unidos (Los)
Uruguay                            |Uruguay
an Uruguayan                       |un Uruguayo
Uruguayan                          |uruguayo,-ya
Venezuela                          |Venezuela
a Venezuelan                       |un Venezolano
Venezuelan                         |venezolano,-na
Würtemberg                         |Wurtemberg
a Würtemberger                     |un Wurtembergués
Würtemberg                         |wurtembergués,-esa
Zealand                            |Zelandia
a Zealander                        |un Zelandés
Zealandian                         |zelandés,-esa
                                   |
                                   |
_Islands and Towns._               |_Islas y Ciudades._
                                   |
Aix-la-Chapelle                    |Aquisgrán
Ajaccio                            |Ayacio
Alexandria                         |Alejandría
Algiers                            |Argel
Angoulême                          |Angulema
Antilles (The)                     |Antillas (Las)
Antwerp                            |Amberes
Athens                             |Atenas
Avignon                            |Aviñón
Azores (The)                       |Azores (Las)
                                   |
Barbadoes                          |Barbada (La)
Basle                              |Basilea
Bayonne                            |Bayona
Berlin                             |Berlín
Berne                              |Berna
Bologna                            |Bolonia
Bordeaux                           |Burdeos
Boulogne                           |Boloña
Bremen                             |Brema
Bruges                             |Brujas
Brussels                           |Bruselas
                                   |
Cairo                              |Cairo (El)
Calais                             |Calais
Cambridge                          |Cambrigia
Canaries (The)                     |Canarias (Las)
Canterbury                         |Cantorbery
Ceylon                             |Ceilán
Coblentz                           |Coblenza
Cologne                            |Colonia
Constance                          |Constancia
Constantinople                     |Constantinopla
Copenhagen                         |Copenhague
Cordova                            |Córdoba
Corsica                            |Córcega
Corunna                            |Coruña (La)
Cracow                             |Cracovia
Crete                              |Creta
Cyprus                             |Chipre
                                   |
Damascus                           |Damasco
Dover                              |Dovres
Dresden                            |Dresde
Dunkirk                            |Dunquerque
                                   |
Edinburgh                          |Edimburgo
                                   |
Florence                           |Florencia
Flushing                           |Flesinga
Frankfort                          |Francfort
Freiburg                           |Friburgo
                                   |
Geneva                             |Ginebra
Genoa                              |Génova
Ghent                              |Gante
Gottenburg                         |Gotemburgo
Guadaloupe                         |Guadalupe
Guernsey                           |Guernesey
                                   |
Hague (The)                        |Haya (La)
Hamburg                            |Hamburgo
Havana                             |Habana (La)
Havre                              |Havre (El)
Hayti                              |Haití
                                   |
Ionian Islands (The)               |Islas Jónicas (Las)
Lausanne                           |Lausana
Leghorn                            |Liorna
Leipsic                            |Leipsic
Leyden                             |Leiden
Liege                              |Lieja
Lisbon                             |Lisboa
London                             |Londres
a native of London                 |un Londinense
Lucerne                            |Lucerna
Lyons                              |Lión
                                   |
Madeira                            |Madera
Madrid                             |Madrid
a native of Madrid                 |un Madrileño
Majorca                            |Mallorca
Malta                              |Malta
Marseilles                         |Marsella
Martinique                         |Martinica
Mauritius                          |Mauricia
Mayence                            |Maguncia
Mechlin                            |Malinas
Milan                              |Milán
Minorca                            |Menorca
Moscow                             |Moscou
                                   |
Naples                             |Nápoles
New York                           |Nueva York
Nice                               |Niza
Nuremberg                          |Nuremberga
Odessa                             |Odesa
Ostend                             |Ostende
                                   |
Paris                              |París
Perpignan                          |Perpiñán
Philippines (The)                  |Filipinas (Las)
Porto Rico                         |Puerto Rico
Prague                             |Praga
                                   |
Ratisbon                           |Ratisbona
Rhodes                             |Rodas
Rome                               |Roma
Rouen                              |Ruán
                                   |
St. Petersburg                     |San Petersburgo
Sardinia                           |Cerdeña
Sicily                             |Sicilia
Smyrna                             |Esmirna
Sparta                             |Esparta
Stockholm                          |Estocolmo
Strasburg                          |Estrasburgo
Syracuse                           |Siracusa
                                   |
Tangiers                           |Tánger
Teneriffe                          |Tenerife
Toulon                             |Tolón
Tunis                              |Túnez
                                   |
Venice                             |Venecia
Versailles                         |Versalles
Vienna                             |Viena
                                   |
Warsaw                             |Varsovia
                                   |
Zürich                             |Zurich
                                   |
                                   |
_Seas, Rivers and Mountains._      |_Mares, Ríos y Montañas._
                                   |
the Adriatic                       |el Adriático
the Ægean Sea                      |el Mar Egeo
the Alps                           |los Alpes
the Amazon                         |el Amazonas, el Marañón
the Andes                          |los Andes
the Apennines                      |los Apeninos
the Arctic Ocean                   |el Océano Artico, el Mar Glacial
the Atlantic                       |el Atlántico
the Baltic                         |el Báltico
the Bay of Biscay                  |el Golfo de Vizcaya, el Mar Cantábrico
the Black Sea                      |el Mar Negro
the Bosphorus                      |el Bósforo
the Caribbean Sea                  |el Mar Caribe
the Caspian Sea                    |el Mar Caspio
the Caucasus                       |el Cáucaso
the Channel (English)              |la Mancha
the Danube                         |el Danubio
the Dardanelles                    |los Dardanelos
the Dead Sea                       |el Mar Muerto
the Douro                          |el Duero
the Downs                          |las Dunas
Etna                               |el Etna
the Garonne                        |el Garona
the German Ocean                   |el Mar del Norte
the Indian Ocean                   |el Océano Indico, el Mar de las Indias
the Irish Sea                      |el Mar de Irlanda
the Mediterranean                  |el Mediterráneo
the Minho                          |el Miño
the Mississippi                    |el Misisipí
the Moselle                        |el Mosela
the Nile                           |el Nilo
the North Sea                      |el Mar del Norte
the Pacific                        |el Pacífico
the Parnassus                      |el Parnaso
the Pyrenees                       |los Pirineos
the Red Sea                        |el Mar Rojo
the Rhine                          |el Rhin
the Rhone                          |el Ródano
the St. Gothard                    |el San Gotardo
the Scheldt                        |el Escalda
the Seine                          |el Sena
the Sound                          |el Sund
the Suez Canal                     |el Canal de Suez
the Tagus                          |el Tajo
the Thames                         |el Támesis
Vesuvius                           |el Vesubio
the Volga                          |el Volga
the White Sea                      |el Mar Blanco
                                   |
                                   |
_Christian Names._                 |_Nombres de Pila._
                                   |
Abraham                            |Abrahán
Adam                               |Adán
Adelaide                           |Adelaida
Adolphus                           |Adolfo
Agnes                              |Inés
Albert                             |Alberto
Alexander                          |Alejandro
Alfred                             |Alfredo
Alice                              |Alicia
Alphonso                           |Alfonso
Andrew                             |Andrés
Ann, Anne, Anna                    |Ana
Anthony                            |Antonio
Tony                               |Toño[11]
Archibald                          |Archibaldo
Arthur                             |Arturo
Augustus                           |Augusto
Austin                             |Agustín
                                   |
Bartholomew                        |Bartolomé
Bat                                |Bartolo
Beatrice                           |Beatriz
Benjamin                           |Benjamín
Bernard                            |Bernardo
Bertha                             |Berta
Bertram                            |Beltrán
Blanche                            |Blanca
Bridget                            |Brígida
Caroline                           |Carolina
Catharine                          |Catalina
Kate                               |Catuca, Catuja
Charles                            |Carlos
Charlotte                          |Carlota
Christian                          |Cristiano
Christina                          |Cristina
Christopher                        |Cristóbal
Chris                              |Tobal
Cicely                             |Cecilia
Claude                             |Claudio
Clement                            |Clemente
Constance                          |Constanza
Constantine                        |Constantino
Cyril                              |Cirilo
                                   |
Daniel                             |Daniel
David                              |David
Dorothy                            |Dorotea
                                   |
Edgar                              |Edgardo
Edith                              |Edita
Edmund                             |Edmundo
Edward                             |Eduardo
Eleanor                            |Leonor
Elizabeth                          |Isabel
Bessy, Lizzie                      |Belita
Ellen                              |Elena
Emily                              |Emilia
Ernest                             |Ernesto
Esther                             |Ester
Eugene                             |Eugenio
Eustace                            |Eustaquio
Eve, Eva                           |Eva
                                   |
Ferdinand                          |Fernando
Florence                           |Florencia
Frances                            |Francisca
Fanny                              |Paca
Francis                            |Francisco
Frank                              |Paco
Frederic(k)                        |Federico
                                   |
Geoffrey                           |Geofredo
George                             |Jorge
Gerald                             |Geraldo
Gerard                             |Gerardo
Gertrude                           |Gertrudis
Gertie                             |Tula
Gilbert                            |Gilberto
Giles                              |Gil
Godfrey                            |Godofredo
Gregory                            |Gregorio
Gustavus                           |Gustavo
Guy                                |Guido
                                   |
Hannah                             |Ana
Harold                             |Haroldo
Harriet                            |Enriqueta
Helen                              |Elena
Henry                              |Enrique
Herbert                            |Herberto
Horace                             |Horacio
Hugh                               |Hugo
                                   |
Ignatius                           |Ignacio
Isabella                           |Isabel
Bel, Belle                         |Bela, Belita
Isidore                            |Isidoro, Isidro
                                   |
Jacob                              |Jacob
James                              |Jaime, Santiago
Jane                               |Juana
Jasper                             |Gaspar
Jeffrey                            |Geofredo
Jeremiah                           |Jeremías
Jerome                             |Jerónimo
Joan                               |Juana
John                               |Juan
Jonathan                           |Jonatás
Joseph                             |José
Joe                                |Pepe
Josephine                          |Josefina
Joshua                             |Josué
Julia                              |Julia
Julius                             |Julio
                                   |
Lawrence                           |Lorenzo
Leonard                            |Leonardo
Leopold                            |Leopoldo
Louis                              |Luís
Louisa                             |Luisa
Lucy                               |Lucía
Luke                               |Lucas
                                   |
Magdalen                           |Magdalena
Margaret                           |Margarita
Marion                             |Mariana
Mark                               |Marcos
Martha                             |Marta
Mary                               |María
May, Molly                         |Mariquita, Maruja
Matthew                            |Mateo
Michael                            |Miguel
                                   |
Nathan                             |Natán
Nathaniel                          |Nataniel
Nicholas                           |Nicolás
                                   |
Oliver                             |Oliverio
Osmond                             |Osmundo
                                   |
Patrick                            |Patricio
Paul                               |Pablo
Pauline                            |Paulina
Peter                              |Pedro
Pete                               |Perico
Philip                             |Felipe
                                   |
Prudence                           |Prudencia
Rachel                             |Raquel
Ralph                              |Raúl
Raymond                            |Ramón
Reginald                           |Reginaldo
Reynold                            |Reinaldo
Richard                            |Ricardo
Robert                             |Roberto
Roderic(k)                         |Rodrigo
Rodolph                            |Rodolfo
Roger                              |Rogerio
Rose, Rosa                         |Rosa
Rosalie                            |Rosalía
Rowland                            |Rolando
Rupert                             |Ruperto
Ruth                               |Rut
                                   |
Sampson                            |Sansón
Samuel                             |Samuel
Sarah                              |Sara
Sophia                             |Sofía
Stephen                            |Esteban
Susan                              |Susana
                                   |
Theodore                           |Teodoro
Theresa                            |Teresa
Thomas                             |Tomás
Timothy                            |Timoteo
Toby                               |Tobías
                                   |
Valentine                          |Valentín
Vincent                            |Vicente
                                   |
Walter                             |Gualterio
William                            |Guillermo
Winifred                           |Winifreda
                                   |
Zachary                            |Zacarías
Zoe                                |Zoa
                                   |
                                   |
Adjectives in Common Use.          |
                                   |
Adjetivos de Uso Corriente.        |
                                   |
Absent                             |Ausente
abundant                           |abundante
accurate                           |exacto
active                             |activo
affable                            |afable
alone                              |solo
amusing                            |divertido
ancient                            |antiguo
artful                             |astuto
attentive                          |atento
attractive                         |atractivo
audible                            |oíble, perceptible
avaricious                         |avaro
awful                              |terrible
awkward                            |torpe
azure                              |azul
Bad                                |Malo
bald                               |calvo
beautiful                          |hermoso, bello
big                                |grande, grueso
bitter                             |amargo
black                              |negro
blackish                           |negruzco
blind                              |ciego
blue                               |azul
blueish                            |azulado
bold                               |atrevido, intrépido
brave                              |valiente
brief                              |breve, corto
bright                             |brillante, claro
broad                              |ancho
brown                              |pardo, moreno
brownish                           |pardusco
bulky                              |abultado, voluminoso
busy                               |ocupado
                                   |
Calm                               |Tranquilo, quieto
careful                            |cuidadoso, prudente
careless                           |descuidado, negligente
celebrated                         |célebre
central                            |central, céntrico
certain                            |cierto, seguro
charitable                         |caritativo
charming                           |encantador
cheap                              |barato
chief                              |principal
choice                             |escogido
clean                              |limpio
clear                              |claro, evidente
clement                            |clemente
clever                             |hábil
cloudy                             |nublado
coarse                             |basto, ordinario
cold                               |frío
collective                         |colectivo
common                             |común
complete                           |completo
complicated                        |complicado
conditional                        |condicional
conservative                       |conservativo
considerable                       |considerable
constant                           |constante
contemporary                       |contemporáneo
content                            |contento, satisfecho
continual                          |continuo
contrary                           |contrario, opuesto
convenient                         |conveniente, oportuno
cool                               |fresco
costly                             |costoso
courageous                         |valiente
cowardly                           |cobarde
crimson                            |carmesí
crippled                           |estropeado
cross                              |enojado, enfadado
crotchety                          |excéntrico, chiflado
crude                              |crudo, tosco
cruel                              |cruel
curious                            |curioso, singular
customary                          |acostumbrado, usual
                                   |
Daily                              |Diario, cotidiano
damp                               |húmedo
dangerous                          |peligroso
daring                             |atrevido, intrépido
dark                               |oscuro; (_complexion_) moreno
dead                               |muerto, difunto
deadly                             |mortal
deaf                               |sordo
dear                               |querido; (_costly_) caro
deceased                           |muerto, difunto
deceitful                          |engañoso, falso
deep                               |profundo
delicate                           |delicado
delicious                          |delicioso
dense                              |denso, compacto
desirous                           |deseoso
desolate                           |desolado, solitario
desperate                          |desesperado, furioso
detestable                         |detestable, aborrecible
dexterous                          |diestro, hábil
different                          |diferente, distinto
difficult                          |difícil, dificultoso
diligent                           |diligente, aplicado
dirty                              |sucio
disagreeable                       |desagradable
discontented                       |descontento
disdainful                         |desdeñoso
disgraceful                        |vergonzoso
disobedient                        |desobediente
dissatisfied                       |descontento
dissolute                          |disoluto
distant                            |distante, lejano
distinct                           |distinto
divine                             |divino
docile                             |dócil
double                             |doble
doubtful                           |dudoso, incierto
doubtless                          |indubitable
dreadful                           |terrible, espantoso
dreary                             |triste, lúgubre
drinkable                          |potable
dry                                |seco
dull                               |estúpido, pesado, triste;
(_dark_) oscuro                    |
dumb                               |mudo
                                   |
Earthly                            |Terrestre
eastern                            |oriental
easy                               |fácil
eatable                            |comestible
economical                         |económico
effective                          |efectivo, eficaz
efficient                          |eficiente, eficaz
electric                           |eléctrico
empty                              |vacío
energetic                          |enérgico, vigoroso
enough                             |bastante, suficiente
equal                              |igual
equitable                          |equitativo
even                               |llano; (_not odd_) par
evil                               |malo
experienced                        |experimentado, experto
extensive                          |extensivo, espacioso
exterior                           |exterior, externo
external                           |externo, exterior
extraordinary                      |extraordinario, singular
extravagant                        |extravagante, pródigo
                                   |
Faint                              |Lánguido; (_dim_) indistinto, tenue
fair                               |justo; (_complexion_) rubio
faithful                           |fiel
faithless                          |infiel
false                              |falso
familiar                           |familiar
famous                             |famoso
far                                |lejano, distante
fast                               |rápido; (_secure_) firme
fat                                |gordo, grueso
favourable                         |favorable
feeble                             |débil
female                             |femenino
ferocious                          |feroz, fiero
fertile                            |fértil, fecundo
fierce                             |feroz, fiero
final                              |final, último
fine                               |fino; (_elegant_) bello, hermoso, elegante
firm                               |firme, sólido
fit                                |propio, conveniente
flat                               |llano, plano
flexible                           |flexible
flimsy                             |débil
fluid                              |fluido
foggy                              |nebuloso
foreign                            |extranjero
foremost                           |delantero
formal                             |formal, ceremonioso
former                             |anterior, primero
fortunate                          |afortunado, dichoso
forward                            |adelantado, delantero
frank                              |franco
free                               |libre
fresh                              |fresco
friendly                           |amigable, amigo
full                               |lleno, completo
                                   |
Gaudy                              |Llamativo
gay                                |alegre, vivo
general                            |general, público
generous                           |generoso, magnánimo
gentle                             |suave, dócil
genuine                            |genuino, legítimo
glad                               |alegre, contento, gozoso
golden                             |áureo, de oro
good                               |bueno
graceful                           |gracioso, agraciado
gracious                           |benigno, benévolo
grateful                           |agradecido, reconocido
gratuitous                         |gratuito
great                              |grande
green                              |verde
greenish                           |verduzco
grey                               |gris; (_of hair_) cano, encanecido
greyish                            |gríseo
guiltless                          |inocente
guilty                             |culpable
                                   |
Handsome                           |Hermoso, guapo
happy                              |feliz, dichoso
hard                               |duro, sólido; (_not easy_) difícil
haughty                            |altanero, altivo
healthy                            |sano, saludable
heavenly                           |celeste, celestial
heavy                              |pesado
high                               |alto
holy                               |santo
honest                             |honrado
hostile                            |hostil, enemigo
hot                                |caliente
hourly                             |por horas, frecuente
human                              |humano
humble                             |humilde
hungry                             |hambriento
                                   |
Icy                                |Helado, frío
idle                               |ocioso, perezoso, holgazán
ignorant                           |ignorante
ill                                |enfermo, malo
immediate                          |inmediato
immodest                           |inmodesto
immoral                            |inmoral
immortal                           |inmortal
importunate                        |importuno, molesto
imprudent                          |imprudente
incapable                          |incapaz
incidental                         |incidental, casual
inconstant                         |inconstante
inconvenient                       |inconveniente, incómodo
incorrect                          |incorrecto, inexacto
incredulous                        |incrédulo
indefatigable                      |infatigable
indifferent                        |indiferente
indocile                           |indócil
inhabitable                        |habitable
inhuman                            |inhumano
injurious                          |dañoso, perjudicial
inland                             |interior
inner                              |interior, interno
innocent                           |inocente
inside                             |interior, interno
insolent                           |insolente
insolvent                          |insolvente
instantaneous                      |instantáneo
instructive                        |instructivo
interior                           |interior, interno
internal                           |interno, interior
invalid                            |inválido
invaluable                         |inestimable
invariable                         |invariable
inventive                          |inventivo
invisible                          |invisible
irksome                            |tedioso, fastidioso
irresponsible                      |irresponsable
                                   |
Jolly                              |Alegre, vivo
joyful                             |alegre
judicious                          |juicioso
just                               |justo
                                   |
Kind                               |Benévolo, amable, bondadoso
known                              |conocido, sabido
                                   |
Lame                               |Cojo
large                              |grande, vasto, espacioso
last                               |último
lavish                             |pródigo
lawful                             |legal, legítimo
lazy                               |perezoso, holgazán
leaden                             |plomizo, de plomo;
(_heavy_) pesado                   |
lean                               |delgado, flaco
learned                            |docto, sabio
left                               |izquierdo, dejado
legal                              |legal, legítimo
level                              |plano, llano, nivelado
liberal                            |liberal, generoso
light                              |ligero; (_colour_) claro
like                               |semejante, parecido
likely                             |probable, verosímil
liquid                             |líquido
little                             |pequeño
lofty                              |alto; (_proud_) altivo
long                               |largo
loose                              |suelto, flojo
loud                               |alto, ruidoso
lovely                             |amable
low                                |bajo
lowly                              |humilde, sumiso
lucky                              |afortunado, feliz, dichoso
lying                              |mentiroso
                                   |
Mad                                |Loco
male                               |masculino
melancholy                         |melancólico
mental                             |mental, intelectual
mercantile                         |mercantil, comercial
merciful                           |misericordioso, compasivo, clemente
merciless                          |cruel, inhumano, desapiadado
merry                              |alegre
middle                             |medio, central
mighty                             |fuerte, poderoso
mild                               |suave, apacible, indulgente
miserable                          |miserable, desdichado
misty                              |nebuloso, brumoso
modest                             |modesto, humilde
monthly                            |mensual
more                               |más
mortal                             |mortal
mysterious                         |misterioso
                                   |
Narrow                             |Estrecho, angosto
neat                               |elegante, limpio
necessary                          |necesario
needless                           |supérfluo, inútil
needy                              |indigente, pobre
negligent                          |negligente, descuidado
new                                |nuevo, reciente, moderno
next                               |próximo, inmediato
nice                               |bonito, delicado
nimble                             |ágil
noisy                              |ruidoso, clamoroso, estrepitoso
northern                           |septentrional
numberless                         |innumerable
numerous                           |numeroso
                                   |
Obscure                            |Oscuro
obstinate                          |obstinado, porfiado
odd                                |singular, excéntrico;
(_not even_) impar,                |
non                                |
odorous                            |oloroso, fragante
old                                |viejo, anciano, antiguo
ordinary                           |ordinario, usual
oriental                           |oriental
other                              |otro
outer                              |exterior, externo
outside                            |exterior, externo
own                                |propio
                                   |
Painful                            |Doloroso
pale                               |pálido, claro
past                               |pasado
patient                            |paciente
peaceable                          |tranquilo, sosegado
peaceful                           |tranquilo, quieto
perfect                            |perfecto, acabado
perpetual                          |perpetuo
pink                               |rosado
pious                              |piadoso
plain                              |sencillo, liso, claro
pleasant                           |agradable, placentero
polite                             |cortés, atento
poor                               |pobre
popular                            |popular
powerful                           |poderoso
practical                          |práctico
pretty                             |bonito, lindo
prior                              |anterior, antecedente, precedente
private                            |privado, particular
profane                            |profano
proper                             |propio, conveniente
proud                              |orgulloso, soberbio, altivo
prudent                            |prudente
pure                               |puro
                                   |
Quarrelsome                        |Pendenciero
quick                              |vivo, rápido, veloz
quiet                              |quieto, tranquilo
                                   |
Rainy                              |Lluvioso
rapid                              |rápido, veloz
raw                                |crudo
ready                              |listo, pronto
real                               |real, verdadero, genuino
reasonable                         |razonable
red                                |rojo, encarnado
reddish                            |rojizo
respectable                        |respetable
respected                          |respetado
responsible                        |responsable
rich                               |rico
right                              |derecho; recto, justo
rightful                           |legítimo
rough                              |áspero, duro
round                              |redondo
                                   |
Sad                                |Triste, melancólico
safe                               |seguro, salvo
same                               |mismo
satisfactory                       |satisfactorio
satisfied                          |satisfecho
secret                             |secreto
self                               |mismo
separate                           |separado, distinto
serious                            |serio, formal, grave
several                            |varios, diversos
shallow                            |somero, superficial
shameless                          |desvergonzado
short                              |corto, breve, sucinto
shrewd                             |astuto, sagaz
shy                                |tímido, miedoso
sickly                             |achacoso, enfermizo
silly                              |necio, tonto, bobo
simple                             |sencillo, simple
sincere                            |sincero
single                             |sencillo, solo, único
skilful                            |hábil
slender                            |delgado, flaco
slow                               |lento, tardío
small                              |pequeño, chico, menudo
smart                              |activo, vivo, elegante
smooth                             |liso, suave
sober                              |sobrio
soft                               |blando, suave
sorry                              |triste, pobre
sour                               |ágrio, ácido, avinagrado
southern                           |meridional
square                             |cuadrado
steady                             |firme, seguro, constante
stern                              |severo, duro
stiff                              |tieso
stormy                             |tempestuoso
straight                           |recto, derecho
strong                             |fuerte, robusto
stubborn                           |terco, obstinado
successful                         |próspero, feliz
such                               |tal, semejante
sure                               |seguro, cierto
sweet                              |dulce
                                   |
Tall                               |Alto, grande
tame                               |domesticado, manso
tedious                            |fastidioso, enojoso
tempting                           |tentador
tender                             |tierno
terrible                           |terrible
thankful                           |agradecido, reconocido
thankless                          |desagradecido, ingrato
thick                              |espeso, grueso
thin                               |delgado, flaco
thirsty                            |sediento
tight                              |apretado, estrecho
timid                              |tímido
timorous                           |medroso
true                               |verdadero, cierto
twisted                            |torcido
                                   |
Ugly                               |Feo
ultimate                           |último, final
unfair                             |injusto
unfaithful                         |infiel
unfortunate                        |desgraciado, desafortunado
ungrateful                         |ingrato
unhappy                            |infeliz
unjust                             |injusto, inicuo
unkind                             |malo, duro
unknown                            |desconocido
unpleasant                         |desagradable
unvarying                          |invariable
unusual                            |raro, extraordinario
useful                             |útil
useless                            |inútil
usual                              |usual, acostumbrado
                                   |
Various                            |Varios, diversos
vast                               |vasto, extenso
venturesome                        |osado, atrevido
vermilion                          |bermejo
vexatious                          |molesto, enfadoso
vexed                              |enfadado, enojado
vicious                            |vicioso
vindictive                         |vengativo
violet                             |morado
virtuous                           |virtuoso
visible                            |visible
vulgar                             |vulgar, común
                                   |
Warm                               |Caliente
weak                               |débil, flojo
wealthy                            |rico, opulento
well                               |bueno
wet                                |húmedo, mojado
whimsical                          |caprichoso
white                              |blanco
whitish                            |blanquecino
whole                              |entero
wholesome                          |sano, saludable
wicked                             |malo, malvado, ruín
wide                               |ancho, vasto
wise                               |sabio, docto
wonderful                          |admirable, maravilloso
worthless                          |indigno, inútil, despreciable
worthy                             |digno, apreciable
wretched                           |miserable
wrong                              |falso, errado, malo
                                   |
Yearly                             |Anual
yellow                             |amarillo
yellowish                          |amarillento
young                              |joven
youthful                           |juvenil, joven
                                   |
Zealous                            |celoso, entusiasta

=Verbs.=

_Conjugation of the Auxiliary Verbs._

=Verbos.=

_Conjugación de los Verbos Auxiliares._

  TO HAVE.              | HABER.
                        |
  _Present Participle_,  |      _Gerundio_,
                        |
  having.               | habiendo.
                        |
   _Past Participle_,     |   _Participio Pasivo_,
                        |
  had.                  | habido.
                        |
  _Present Indicative._  | _Presente de Indicativo_.
                        |
  I have                | yo he
  thou hast             | tú has
  he, she (it) has      | él, ella ha
  we have               | nosotros,-as hemos
  you (ye) have         | vosotros,-as habéis
  they have             | ellos,-as han
                        |
  _Imperfect._            | _Imperfecto._
                        |
  I had                 | yo había
  thou hadst            | tú habías
  he had                | él había
  we had                | nosotros habíamos
  you had               | vosotros habíais
  they had              | ellos habían
                        |
  _Past Definite._        | _Definido._
                        |
  I had                 | yo hube
  thou hadst            | tú hubiste
  he had                | él hubo
  we had                | nosotros hubimos
  you had               | vosotros hubisteis
  they had              | ellos hubieron
                        |
  _Future._               | _Futuro._
                        |
  I shall have          | yo habré
  thou wilt have        | tú habrás
  he will have          | él habrá
  we shall have         | nosotros habremos
  you will have         | vosotros habréis
  they will have        | ellos habrán
                        |
  _Conditional._          | _Condicional._
                        |
  I should have         | yo habría
  thou wouldst have     | tú habrías
  he would have         | él habría
  we should have        | nosotros habríamos
  you would have        | vosotros habríais
  they would have       | ellos habrían
                        |
  _Present Subjunctive._  | _Presente de Subjuntivo._
                        |
  that I have           | que haya
  that thou have        | que hayas
  that he have          | que haya
  that we have          | que hayamos
  that you have         | que hayáis
  that they have        | que hayan
                        |
  _Imperfect._            | _Imperfecto._
                        |
  that I had            | que hubiese
  that thou hadst       | que hubieses
  that he had           | que hubiese
  that we had           | que hubiésemos
  that you had          | que hubieseis
  that they had         | que hubiesen
                        |
  _Future._               | _Futuro._
                        |
  that I shall have     | que hubiere
  that thou wilt have   | que hubieres
  that he will have     | que hubiere
  that we shall have    | que hubiéremos
  that you will have    | que hubiereis
  that they will have   | que hubieren
                        |
      _Conditional_.      |   _Condicional_.
                        |
  that I should have    | que hubiera
  that thou wouldst have| que hubieras
  that he would have    | que hubiera
  that we should have   | que hubiéramos
  that you would have   | que hubierais
  that they would have  | que hubieran


  TO HAVE (possess).    | TENER.
                        |
  _Present Participle_,   | _Gerundio_,
                        |
  having.               | teniendo.
                        |
  _Past Participle_,      | _Participio Pasivo_,
                        |
  had.                  | tenido.
                        |
  _Present Indicative_.   | _Presente de Indicativo_.
                        |
  I have                | tengo
  thou hast             | tienes
  he, she (it) has      | tiene
  we have               | tenemos
  you (ye) have         | tenéis
  they have             | tienen
                        |
  _Imperfect_.            |     _Imperfecto_.
                        |
  I had                 | tenía
  thou hadst            | tenías
  he had                | tenía
  we had                | teníamos
  you had               | teníais
  they had              | tenían
                        |
  _Past Definite._        | _Definido._
                        |
  I had                 | tuve
  thou hadst            | tuviste
  he had                | tuvo
  we had                | tuvimos
  you had               | tuvisteis
  they had              | tuvieron
                        |
  _Future._               | _Futuro._
                        |
  I shall have          | tendré
  thou wilt have        | tendrás
  he will have          | tendrá
  we shall have         | tendremos
  you will have         | tendréis
  they will have        | tendrán
                        |
  _Conditional._          | _Condicional._
                        |
  I should have         | tendría
  thou wouldst have     | tendrías
  he would have         | tendría
  we should have        | tendríamos
  you would have        | tendríais
  they would have       | tendrían
                        |
  _Imperative._           | _Imperativo._
                        |
  have thou             | ten
  let him have          | tenga
  let us have           | tengamos
  have ye               | tened
  let them have         | tengan
                        |
  _Present Subjunctive._| _Presente de Subjuntivo._
                        |
  that I have           | que tenga
  that thou have        | que tengas
  that he have          | que tenga
  that we have          | que tengamos
  that you have         | que tengáis
  that they have        | que tengan
                        |
  _Imperfect._            | _Imperfecto._
                        |
  that I had            | que tuviese
  that thou hadst       | que tuvieses
  that he had           | que tuviese
  that we had           | que tuviésemos
  that you had          | que tuvieseis
  that they had         | que tuviesen
                        |
  _Future._               | _Futuro._
                        |
  that I shall have     | que tuviere
  that thou wilt have   | que tuvieres
  that he will have     | que tuviere
  that we shall have    | que tuviéremos
  that you will have    | que tuviereis
  that they will        | que tuvieren
                        |
  _Conditional._          | _Condicional._
                        |
  that I should have    | que tuviera
  that thou wouldst have| que tuvieras
  that he would have    | que tuviera
  that we should have   | que tuviéramos
  that you would have   | que tuvierais
  that they would have  | que tuvieran


  TO BE (permanently).  | SER.
                        |
  _Present Participle_,   | _Gerundio_,
                        |
  being.                | siendo.
                        |
  _Past Participle_,      | _Participio Pasivo_,
                        |
  been.                 | sido.
                        |
  _Present Indicative._   | _Presente de Indicativo._
                        |
  I am                  | soy
  thou art              | eres
  he, she (it) is       | es
  we are                | somos
  you (ye) are          | sois
  they are              | son
                        |
  _Imperfect._            | _Imperfecto._
                        |
  I was                 | era
  thou wast             | eras
  he was                | era
  we were               | éramos
  you were              | erais
  they were             | eran
                        |
  _Past Definite._        | _Definido._
                        |
  I was                 | fuí
  thou wast             | fuiste
  he was                | fué
  we were               | fuimos
  you were              | fuisteis
  they were             | fueron
                        |
   _Future._              | _Futuro._
                        |
   I shall be           | seré
   thou wilt be         | serás
   he will be           | será
   we shall be          | seremos
   you will be          | seréis
   they will be         | serán
                        |
   _Conditional._         | _Condicional._
                        |
   I should be          | sería
   thou wouldst be      | serías
   he would be          | sería
   we should be         | seríamos
   you would be         | seríais
   they would be        | serían
                        |
   _Imperative._          | _Imperativo._
                        |
   be thou              | sé
   let him be           | sea
   let us be            | seamos
   be ye                | sed
   let them be          | sean
                        |
   _Present Subjunctive._ | _Presente de Subjuntivo._
                        |
   that I be            | que sea
   that thou be         | que seas
   that he be           | que sea
   that we be           | que seamos
   that you be          | que seáis
   that they be         | que sean
                        |
  _Imperfect._            | _Imperfecto._
                        |
  that I were           | que fuese
  that thou wert        | que fueses
  that he were          | que fuese
  that we were          | que fuésemos
  that you were         | que fueseis
  that they were        | que fuesen
                        |
  _Future._               | _Futuro._
                        |
  that I shall be       | que fuere
  that thou wilt be     | que fueres
  that he will be       | que fuere
  that we shall be      | que fuéremos
  that you will be      | que fuereis
  that they will be     | que fueren
                        |
  _Conditional._          | _Condicional._
                        |
  that I should be      | que fuera
  that thou wouldst be  | que fueras
  that he would be      | que fuera
  that we should be     | que fuéramos
  that you would be     | que fuerais
  that they would be    | que fueran


  TO BE (temporarily).  | ESTAR.
                        |
  _Present Participle_,   | _Gerundio_,
                        |
  being.                | estando.
                        |
  _Past Participle_,      | _Participio Pasivo_,
                        |
  been.                 | estado.
                        |
  _Present Indicative._   |  _Presente de Indicativo._
                        |
  I am                  | estoy
  thou art              | estás
  he, she (it) is       | está
  we are                | estamos
  you (ye) are          | estáis
  they are              | están
                        |
  _Imperfect._            | _Imperfecto._
                        |
  I was                 | estaba
  thou wast             | estabas
  he was                | estaba
  we were               | estábamos
  you were              | estabais
  they were             | estaban
                        |
  _Past Definite._        | _Definido._
                        |
  I was                 | estuve
  thou wast             | estuviste
  he was                | estuvo
  we were               | estuvimos
  you were              | estuvisteis
  they were             | estuvieron
                        |
  _Future._               | _Futuro._
                        |
  I shall be            | estaré
  thou wilt be          | estarás
  he will be            | estará
  we shall be           | estaremos
  you will be           | estaréis
  they will be          | estarán
                        |
  _Conditional._          | _Condicional._
                        |
  I should be           | estaría
  thou wouldst be       | estarías
  he would be           | estaría
  we should be          | estaríamos
  you would be          | estaríais
  they would be         | estarían
                        |
  _Imperative._           | _Imperativo._
                        |
  be thou               | está
  let him be            | esté
  let us be             | estemos
  be ye                 | estad
  let them be           | estén
                        |
  _Present Subjunctive._  | _Presente de Subjuntivo._
                        |
  that I be             | que esté
  that thou be          | que estés
  that he be            | que esté
  that we be            | que estemos
  that you be           | que estéis
  that they be          | que estén
                        |
  _Imperfect._            | _Imperfecto._
                        |
  that I were           | que estuviese
  that thou wert        | que estuvieses
  that he were          | que estuviese
  that we were          | que estuviésemos
  that you were         | que estuvieseis
  that they were        | que estuviesen


  ENGLISH.                   SPANISH.

  _Future._          _Futuro._

  that I shall be          que estuviere
  that thou wilt be          que estuvieres
  that he will be          que estuviere
  that we shall be          que estuviéremos
  that you will be          que estuviereis
  that they will be          que estuvieren

  _Conditional._          _Condicional._

  that I should be          que estuviera
  that thou wouldst be          que estuvieras
  that he would be          que estuviera
  that we should be          que estuviéramos
  that you would be          que estuvierais
  that they would be          que estuvieran


  _The three Regular Conjugations._      _Las tres Conjugaciones Regulares._

  1st in AR.     2nd in ER.     3rd in IR.

  _To speak,_      _To drink,_     _To divide,_

  HABLAR.       BEBER.       PARTIR.

  _Present Participle._

  hablando       bebiendo       partiendo


  _Past Participle._

  hablado       bebido       partido

  Present Indicative.

  hablo     bebo     parto
  hablas     bebes     partes
  habla     bebe     parte
  hablamos     bebemos     partimos
  habláis     bebéis     partís
  hablan     beben     parten

       Imperfect.

  hablaba     bebía     partía
  hablabas     bebías     partías
  hablaba     bebía     partía
  hablábamos     bebíamos     partíamos
  hablabais     bebíais     partíais
  hablaban     bebían     partían

       Past Definite.

  hablé     bebí     partí
  hablaste     bebiste     partiste
  habló     bebió     partió
  hablamos     bebimos     partimos
  hablasteis     bebisteis     partisteis
  hablaron     bebieron     partieron

       Future.

  hablaré     beberé     partiré
  hablarás     beberás     partirás
  hablará     beberá     partirá
  hablaremos     beberemos     partiremos
  hablaréis     beberéis     partiréis
  hablarán     beberán     partirán


_Conditional._

  hablaría         | bebería         | partiría
  hablarías        | beberías        | partirías
  hablaría         | bebería         | partiría
  hablaríamos      | beberíamos      | partiríamos
  hablaríais       | beberíais       | partiríais
  hablarían        | beberían        | partirían


_Imperative._

  habla            | bebe            | parte
  hable            | beba            | parta
  hablemos         | bebamos         | partamos
  hablad           | bebed           | partid
  hablen           | beban           | partan


_Present Subjunctive._

  hable            | beba            | parta
  hables           | bebas           | partas
  hable            | beba            | parta
  hablemos         | bebamos         | partamos
  habléis          | bebáis          | partáis
  hablen           | beban           | partan


_Imperfect._

  hablase          | bebiese         | partiese
  hablases         | bebieses        | partieses
  hablase          | bebiese         | partiese
  hablásemos       | bebiésemos      | partiésemos
  hablaseis        | bebieseis       | partieseis
  hablasen         | bebiesen        | partiesen


_Future._

  hablare         | bebiere         | partiere
  hablares        | bebieres        | partieres
  hablare         | bebiere         | partiere
  habláremos      | bebiéremos      | partiéremos
  hablareis       | bebiereis       | partiereis
  hablaren        | bebieren        | partieren


_Conditional._

  hablara         | bebiera         | partiera
  hablaras        | bebieras        | partieras
  hablara         | bebiera         | partiera
  habláramos      | bebiéramos      | partiéramos
  hablarais       | bebierais       | partierais
  hablaran        | bebieran        | partieran


THE PRINCIPAL IRREGULAR VERBS.

_Los Verbos Irregulares Principales._

TO ACQUIRE, ADQUIRIR: _acquiring_, adquiriendo; _acquired_, adquirido.

PRES. IND.[12]: _I acquire_, _etc._: adquiero, adquieres, adquiere,
adquirimos, adquirís, adquieren.

IMPERATIVE: _acquire_: adquiere, adquiera, adquiramos, adquirid,
adquieran.

PRES. SUB.: _that I acquire_, _etc._: que adquiera, adquieras, adquiera,
adquiramos, adquiráis, adquieran.

TO AGREE, ACORDAR: _agreeing_, acordando; _agreed_, acordado.

PRES. IND.: _I agree_, _etc._: acuerdo, acuerdas, acuerda, acordamos,
acordáis, acuerdan.

IMPERATIVE: _agree_: acuerda, acuerde, acordemos, acordad, acuerden.

PRES. SUB.: _that I agree_, _etc._: que acuerde, acuerdes, acuerde,
acordemos, acordéis, acuerden.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO ASK, DEMAND, PEDIR: _asking_, pidiendo; _asked_, pedido.

PRES. IND.: _I ask_, _etc._: pido, pides, pide, pedimos, pedís, piden.

PAST DEF.: _I asked_, _etc._: pedí, pediste, pidió, pedimos, pedisteis,
pidieron.

IMPERATIVE: _ask_: pide, pida, pidamos, pedid, pidan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I ask_, _etc._: que pida, pidas, pida, pidamos,
pidáis, pidan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I asked_, _etc._: que pidiese, pidieses, pidiese,
pidiésemos, pidieseis, pidiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall ask_, _etc._: que pidiere, pidieres, pidiere,
pidiéremos, pidiereis, pidieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should ask_, _etc._: que pidiera, pidieras, pidiera,
pidiéramos, pidierais, pidieran.

TO BE ABLE, PODER: _being able_, pudiendo; _been able_, podido.

PRES. IND.: _I am able (can)_, _etc._: puedo, puedes, puede, podemos,
podéis, pueden.

PAST DEF.: _I was able (could)_, _etc._: pude, pudiste, pudo, pudimos,
pudisteis, pudieron.

FUTURE: _I shall be able_, _etc._: podré, podrás, podrá, podremos,
podréis, podrán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should be able_, _etc._: podría, podrías, podría,
podríamos, podríais, podrían.

PRES. SUB.: _that I be able_, _etc._: que pueda, puedas, pueda, podamos,
podáis, puedan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I were able_, _etc._: que pudiese, pudieses,
pudiese, pudiésemos, pudieseis, pudiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall be able_, _etc._: que pudiere, pudieres,
pudiere, pudiéremos, pudiereis, pudieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should be able_, _etc._: que pudiera, pudieras,
pudiera, pudiéramos, pudierais, pudieran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO BEGIN, EMPEZAR: _beginning_, empezando; _begun_, empezado.

PRES. IND.: _I begin_, _etc._: empiezo, empiezas, empieza, empezamos,
empezáis, empiezan.

empecemos, empezad, empiecen.

PRES SUB.: _that I begin_, _etc._: que empiece, empieces, empiece,
empecemos, empecéis, empiecen.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO BRING, TRAER: _bringing_, trayendo; _brought_, traído.

PRES. IND.: _I bring_, _etc._: traigo, traes, trae, traemos, traéis,
traen.

PAST DEF.: _I brought_, _etc._: traje, trajiste, trajo, trajimos,
trajisteis, trajeron.

IMPERATIVE: _bring_: trae, traiga, traigamos, traed, traigan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I bring_, _etc._: que traiga, traigas, traiga,
traigamos, traigáis, traigan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I brought_, _etc._: que trajese, trajeses, trajese,
trajésemos, trajeseis, trajesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall bring_, _etc._: que trajere, trajeres, trajere,
trajéremos, trajereis, trajeren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should bring_, _etc._: que trajera, trajeras,
trajera, trajéramos, trajerais, trajeran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO COME, VENIR: _coming_, viniendo; _come_, venido.

PRES. IND.: _I come_, _etc._: vengo, vienes, viene, venimos, venís,
vienen. vinimos, vinisteis, vinieron.

FUTURE: _I shall come_, _etc._: vendré, vendrás, vendrá, vendremos,
vendréis, vendrán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should come_, _etc._: vendría, vendrías, vendría,
vendríamos, vendríais, vendrían.

IMPERATIVE: _come_: ven, venga, vengamos, venid, vengan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I come_, _etc._: que venga, vengas, venga, vengamos,
vengáis, vengan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I came_, _etc._: que viniese, vinieses, viniese,
viniésemos, vinieseis, viniesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall come_, _etc._: que viniere, vinieres, viniere,
viniéremos, viniereis, vinieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should come_, _etc._: que viniera, vinieras,
viniera, viniéramos, vinierais, vinieran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO COMMENCE, COMENZAR: _commencing_, comenzando; _commenced_, comenzado.

PRES. IND.: _I commence_, _etc._: comienzo, comienzas, comienza,
comenzamos, comenzáis, comienzan.

IMPERATIVE: _commence_: comienza, comience, comencemos, comenzad,
comiencen.

PRES. SUB.: _that I commence_, _etc._: que comience, comiences,
comience, comencemos, comencéis, comiencen.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO DO, MAKE, HACER: _doing_, haciendo; _done_, hecho.

PRES. IND.: _I do_, _etc._: hago, haces, hace, hacemos, hacéis, hacen.

PAST DEF.: _I did_, _etc._: hice, hiciste, hizo, hicimos, hicisteis,
hicieron.

FUTURE: _I shall do_, _etc._: haré, harás, hará, haremos, haréis, harán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should do_, _etc._: haría, harías, haría, haríamos,
haríais, harían.

IMPERATIVE: _do_: haz, haga, hagamos, haced, hagan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I do_, _etc._: que haga, hagas, haga, hagamos, hagáis,
hagan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I did_, _etc._: que hiciese, hicieses, hiciese,
hiciésemos, hicieseis, hiciesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall do_, _etc._: que hiciere, hicieres, hiciere,
hiciéremos, hiciereis, hicieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should do_, _etc._: que hiciera, hicieras, hiciera,
hiciéramos, hicierais, hicieran.

TO FALL, CAER: _falling_, cayendo; _fallen_, caído.

PRES. IND.: _I fall_, _etc._: caigo, caes, cae, caemos, caéis, caen.

IMPERATIVE: _fall_: cae, caiga, caigamos, caed, caigan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I fall_, _etc._: que caiga, caigas, caiga, caigamos,
caigáis, caigan.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO FEEL, SENTIR: _feeling_, sintiendo; _felt_, sentido.

PRES. IND.: _I feel_, _etc._: siento, sientes, siente, sentimos, sentís,
sienten.

PAST DEF.: _I felt_, _etc._: sentí, sentiste, sintió, sentimos,
sentisteis, sintieron.

IMPERATIVE: _feel_: siente, sienta, sintamos, sentid, sientan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I feel_, _etc._: que sienta, sientas, sienta,
sintamos, sintáis, sientan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I felt_, _etc._: que sintiese, sintieses, sintiese,
sintiésemos, sintieseis, sintiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall feel_, _etc._: que sintiere, sintieres,
sintiere, sintiéremos, sintiereis, sintieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should feel_, _etc._: que sintiera, sintieras,
sintiera, sintiéramos, sintierais, sintieran.

TO FOLLOW, SEGUIR: _following_, siguiendo; _followed_, seguido.

PRES. IND.: _I follow_, _etc._: sigo, sigues, sigue, seguimos, seguís,
siguen.

PAST DEF.: _I followed_, _etc._: seguí, seguiste, siguió, seguimos,
seguisteis, siguieron.

IMPERATIVE: _follow_: sigue, siga, sigamos, seguid, sigan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I follow_, _etc._: que siga, sigas, siga, sigamos,
sigáis, sigan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I followed_, _etc._: que siguiese, siguieses,
siguiese, siguiésemos, siguieseis, siguiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall follow_, _etc._: que siguiere, siguieres,
siguiere, siguiéremos siguiereis, siguieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should follow_, _etc._: que siguiera, siguieras,
siguiera, siguiéramos, siguierais, siguieran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO GIVE, DAR: _giving_, dando; _given_, dado.

PRES. IND.: _I give_, _etc._: doy, das, da, damos, dais, dan.

PAST DEF.: _I gave_, _etc._: di, diste, dió, dimos, disteis, dieron.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I gave_, _etc._: que diese, dieses, diese, diésemos,
dieseis, diesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall give_, _etc._: que diere, dieres, diere,
diéremos, diereis, dieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should give_, _etc._: que diera, dieras, diera,
diéramos, dierais, dieran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO GO, IR: _going_, yendo; _gone_, ido.

PRES. IND.: _I go_, _etc._: voy, vas, va, vamos, vais, van.

IMPERFECT: _I used to go_, _etc._: iba, ibas, iba, íbamos, ibais, iban.

PAST DEF.: _I went_, _etc._: fuí, fuiste, fué, fuimos, fuisteis, fueron.

IMPERATIVE: _go_: ve, vaya, vamos (vayamos), id, vayan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I go_, _etc._: que vaya, vayas, vaya, vayamos, vayáis,
vayan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I went_, _etc._: que fuese, fueses, fuese, fuésemos,
fueseis, fuesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall go_, _etc._: que fuere, fueres, fuere,
fuéremos, fuereis, fueren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should go_, _etc._: que fuera, fueras, fuera,
fuéramos, fuerais, fueran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO GO OUT, SALIR: _going out_, saliendo; _gone out_, salido.

PRES. IND.: _I go out_, _etc._: salgo, sales, sale, salimos, salís,
salen.

FUTURE: _I shall go out_, _etc._: saldré, saldrás, saldrá, saldremos,
saldréis, saldrán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should go out_, _etc._: saldría, saldrías, saldría,
saldríamos, saldríais, saldrían.

IMPERATIVE: _go out_: sal, salga, salgamos, salid, salgan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I go out_, _etc._: que salga, salgas, salga, salgamos,
salgáis, salgan.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO GUESS, ACERTAR: _guessing_, acertando; _guessed_, acertado.

PRES. IND.: _I guess_, _etc._: acierto, aciertas, acierta, acertamos,
acertáis, aciertan.

IMPERATIVE: _guess_: acierta, acierte, acertemos, acertad, acierten.

PRES. SUB.: _that I guess_, _etc._: que acierte, aciertes, acierte,
acertemos, acertéis, acierten.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO HEAR, OIR: _hearing_, oyendo; _heard_, oído.

PRES. IND.: _I hear_, _etc._: oigo, oyes, oye, oímos, oís, oyen.

IMPERATIVE: _hear_: oye, oiga, oigamos, oíd, oigan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I hear_, _etc._: que oiga, oigas, oiga, oigamos,
oigáis, oigan.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO KNOW, BE ACQUAINTED WITH, CONOCER: _knowing_, conociendo; _known_,
conocido.

PRES. IND.: _I know_, _etc._: conozco, conoces, conoce, conocemos,
conocéis, conocen.

IMPERATIVE: _know_: conoce, conozca, conozcamos, conoced, conozcan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I know_, _etc._: que conozca, conozcas, conozca,
conozcamos, conozcáis, conozcan.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO KNOW, BE AWARE, SABER: _knowing_, sabiendo; _known_, sabido.

PRES. IND.: _I know_, _etc._: sé, sabes, sabe, sabemos, sabéis, saben.

PAST DEF.: _I knew_, _etc._: supe, supiste, supo, supimos, supisteis,
supieron.

FUTURE: _I shall know_, _etc._: sabré, sabrás, sabrá, sabremos, sabréis,
sabrán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should know_, _etc._: sabría, sabrías, sabría,
sabríamos, sabríais, sabrían.

IMPERATIVE: _know_: sabe, sepa, sepamos, sabed, sepan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I know_, _etc._: que sepa, sepas, sepa, sepamos,
sepáis, sepan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I knew_, _etc._: que supiese, supieses, supiese,
supiésemos, supieseis, supiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall know_, _etc._: que supiere, supieres, supiere,
supiéremos, supiereis, supieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should know_, _etc._: que supiera, supieras,
supiera, supiéramos, supierais, supieran.

TO LOSE, PERDER: _losing_, perdiendo; _lost_, perdido.

PRES. IND.: _I lose_, _etc._: pierdo, pierdes, pierde, perdemos,
perdéis, pierden.

IMPERATIVE: _lose_: pierde, pierda, perdamos, perded, pierdan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I lose_, _etc._: que pierda, pierdas, pierda,
perdamos, perdáis, pierdan.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO MEET, ENCONTRAR: _meeting_, encontrando; _met_, encontrado.

PRES. IND.: _I meet_, _etc._: encuentro, encuentras, encuentra,
encontramos, encontráis, encuentran.

IMPERATIVE: _meet_: encuentra, encuentre, encontremos, encontrad,
encuentren.

PRES. SUB.: _that I meet_, _etc._: que encuentre, encuentres, encuentre,
encontremos, encontréis, encuentren.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO PLAY, JUGAR: _playing_, jugando; _played_, jugado.

PRES. IND.: _I play_, _etc._: juego, juegas, juega, jugamos, jugáis,
juegan.

IMPERATIVE: _play_: juega, juegue, juguemos, jugad, jueguen.

PRES. SUB.: _that I play_, _etc._: que juegue, juegues, juegue,
juguemos, juguéis, jueguen.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO PUT, PONER: _putting_, poniendo; _put_, puesto.

PRES. IND.: _I put_, _etc._: pongo, pones, pone, ponemos, ponéis, ponen.

PAST DEF.: _I put_, _etc._: puse, pusiste, puso, pusimos, pusisteis,
pusieron.

FUTURE: _I shall put_, _etc._: pondré, pondrás, pondrá, pondremos,
pondréis, pondrán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should put_, _etc._: pondría, pondrías, pondría,
pondríamos, pondríais, pondrían.

IMPERATIVE: _put_: pon, ponga, pongamos, poned, pongan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I put_, _etc._: que ponga, pongas, ponga, pongamos,
pongáis, pongan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I put_, _etc._: que pusiese, pusieses, pusiese,
pusiésemos, pusieseis, pusiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall put_, _etc._: que pusiere, pusieres, pusiere,
pusiéremos, pusiereis, pusieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should put_, _etc._: que pusiera, pusieras, pusiera,
pusiéramos, pusierais, pusieran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO RETURN, VOLVER: _returning_, volviendo; _returned_, vuelto.

PRES. IND.: _I return_, _etc._: vuelvo, vuelves, vuelve, volvemos,
volvéis, vuelven.

IMPERATIVE: _return_: vuelve, vuelva, volvamos, volved, vuelvan.

_Pres. Sub._: _that I return_, _etc._: que vuelva, vuelvas, vuelva,
volvamos, volváis, vuelvan.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO SAY, TELL, DECIR: _saying_, diciendo; _said_, dicho.

PRES. IND.: _I say_, _etc._: digo, dices, dice, decimos, decís, dicen.

PAST DEF.: _I said_, _etc._: dije, dijiste, dijo, dijimos, dijisteis,
dijeron.

FUTURE: _I shall say_, _etc._: diré, dirás, dirá, diremos, diréis,
dirán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should say_, _etc._: diría, dirías, diría, diríamos,
diríais, dirían.

IMPERATIVE: _say_: dí, diga, digamos, decid, digan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I say_, _etc._: que diga, digas, diga, digamos,
digáis, digan.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I said_, _etc._: que dijese, dijeses, dijese,
dijésemos, dijeseis, dijesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall say_, _etc._: que dijere, dijeres, dijere,
dijéremos, dijereis, dijeren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should say_, _etc._: que dijera, dijeras, dijera,
dijéramos, dijerais, dijeran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO SEE, VER: _seeing_, viendo; _seen_, visto.

PRES. IND.: _I see_, _etc._: veo, ves, ve, vemos, veis, ven.

IMPERFECT: _I used to see_, _etc._: veía, veías, veía, veíamos, veíais,
veían.

IMPERATIVE: _see_: ve, vea, veamos, ved, vean.

PRES. SUB.: _that I see_, _etc._: que vea, veas, vea, veamos, veáis,
vean.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO SLEEP, DORMIR: _sleeping_, durmiendo; _slept_, dormido.

PRES. IND.: _I sleep_, _etc._: duermo, duermes, duerme, dormimos,
dormís, duermen.

PAST DEF.: _I slept_, _etc._: dormí, dormiste, durmió, dormimos,
dormisteis, durmieron.

IMPERATIVE: _sleep_: duerme, duerma, durmamos, dormid, duerman.

PRES. SUB.: _that I sleep_, _etc._: que duerma, duermas, duerma,
durmamos, durmáis, duerman.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I slept_, _etc._: que durmiese, durmieses, durmiese,
durmiésemos, durmieseis, durmiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall sleep_, _etc._: que durmiere, durmieres,
durmiere, durmiéremos, durmiereis, durmieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should sleep_, _etc._: que durmiera, durmieras,
durmiera, durmiéramos, durmierais, durmieran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THANK, AGRADECER: _thanking_, agradeciendo, _thanked_, agradecido.

PRES. IND.: _I thank_, _etc._: agradezco, agradeces, agradece,
agradecemos, agradecéis, agradecen.

IMPERATIVE: _thank_: agradece, agradezca, agradezcamos, agradeced,
agradezcan.

PRES. SUB.: _that I thank_, _etc._: que agradezca, agradezcas,
agradezca, agradezcamos, agradezcáis, agradezcan.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO THINK, PENSAR: _thinking_, pensando; _thought_, pensado.

PRES. IND.: _I think_, _etc._: pienso, piensas, piensa, pensamos,
pensáis, piensan.

IMPERATIVE: _think_: piensa, piense, pensemos pensad, piensen.

PRES. SUB.: _that I think_, _etc._: que piense, pienses, piense,
pensemos, penséis, piensen.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO WALK, ANDAR: _walking_, andando; _walked_, andado.

PAST DEF.: _I walked_, _etc._: anduve, anduviste, anduvo, anduvimos,
anduvisteis, anduvieron.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I walked_, _etc._: que anduviese, anduvieses,
anduviese, anduviésemos, anduvieseis, anduviesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall walk_, _etc._: que anduviere, anduvieres,
anduviere, anduviéremos, anduviereis, anduvieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should walk_, _etc._: que anduviera, anduvieras,
anduviera, anduviéramos, anduvierais, anduvieran.

       *       *       *       *       *

TO WISH, LIKE, QUERER: _wishing_, queriendo; _wished_, querido.

PRES. IND.: _I wish_, _etc._: quiero, quieres, quiere, queremos,
queréis, quieren.

PAST DEF.: _I wished_, _etc._: quise, quisiste, quiso, quisimos,
quisisteis, quisieron.

FUTURE: _I shall wish_, _etc._: querré, querrás, querrá, querremos,
querréis, querrán.

CONDITIONAL: _I should wish_, _etc._: querría, querrías, querría,
querríamos, querríais, querrían.

IMPERATIVE: _wish_: quiere, quiera, queramos, quered, quieran.

PRES. SUB.: _that I wish_, _etc._: que quiera, quieras, quiera,
queramos, queráis, quieran.

IMPERF. SUB.: _that I wished_, _etc._: que quisiese, quisieses,
quisiese, quisiésemos, quisieseis, quisiesen.

FUT. SUB.: _that I shall wish_, _etc._: que quisiere, quisieres,
quisiere, quisiéremos, quisiereis, quisieren.

COND. SUB.: _that I should wish_, _etc._: que quisiera, quisieras,
quisiera, quisiéramos, quisierais, quisieran.


VERBOS WITH THEIR PAST PARTICIPLES.

_Verbos con sus Participios Pasivos._

  ENGLISH.                  | SPANISH.
                            |
  to accept, accepted       | aceptar, aceptado
  to accompany, accompanied | acompañar, acompañado
  to admire, admired        | admirar, admirado
  to amuse, amused          | divertir, divertido
  to answer, answered       | contestar, contestado; responder, respondido
  to arrive, arrived        | llegar, llegado
  to ask, asked             | preguntar, preguntado; pedir, pedido
  to assure, assured        | asegurar, asegurado
  to attend, attended       | atender, atendido
  to avoid, avoided         | evitar, evitado
  to await, awaited         | esperar, esperado; aguardar, aguardado
  to bathe, bathed          | bañar, bañado
  to be, been               | ser, sido; estar, estado
  to be able, been able     | poder, podido
  to begin, begun           | empezar, empezado; comenzar, comenzado
  to believe, believed      | creer, creído
  to bite, bitten           | morder, mordido
  to bring, brought         | traer, traído
  to brush, brushed         | cepillar, cepillado
  to build, built           | construir, construído; edificar, edificado
  to buy, bought            | comprar, comprado
  to call, called           | llamar, llamado
  to carry, carried         | llevar, llevado
  to catch, caught          | coger, cogido
  to change, changed        | cambiar, cambiado
  to charge, charged        | cargar, cargado
  to choose, chosen         | escoger, escogido
  to clean, cleaned         | limpiar, limpiado
  to come, come             | venir, venido
  to come back, come back   | volver, vuelto
  to condemn, condemned     | condenar, condenado
  to confirm, confirmed     | confirmar, confirmado
  to consent, consented     | consentir, consentido
  to conserve, conserved    | conservar, conservado
  to cook, cooked           | cocer, cocido
  to copy, copied           | copiar, copiado
  to cough, coughed         | toser, tosido
   to cover, covered        | cubrir, cubierto
   to cross, crossed        | cruzar, cruzado
   to cry, cried            | llorar, llorado
   to cut, cut              | cortar, cortado
   to dance, danced         | bailar, bailado; danzar, danzado
   to deny, denied          | negar, negado
   to despise, despised     | despreciar, despreciado
   to destroy, destroyed    | destruir, destruido
   to die, died             | morir, muerto
   to differ, differed      | diferir, diferido
   to dine, dined           | comer, comido
   to discover, discovered  | descubrir, descubierto
   to do, done              | hacer, hecho
   to doubt, doubted        | dudar, dudado
   to dress, dressed        | vestir, vestido
   to drink, drunk          | beber, bebido
   to eat, eaten            | comer, comido
   to employ, employed      | emplear, empleado
   to enjoy, enjoyed        | gozar, gozado; disfrutar, disfrutado
   to enquire, enquired     | preguntar, preguntado
   to enter, entered        | entrar, entrado
   to err, erred            | errar, errado
   to esteem, esteemed      | estimar, estimado
   to examine, examined     | examinar, examinado
   to exclaim, exclaimed    | exclamar, exclamado
   to expect, expected      | esperar, esperado
  to fall, fallen           | caer, caído
  to fear, feared           | temer, temido
  to feel, felt             | sentir, sentido
  to fill, filled           | llenar, llenado
  to find, found            | hallar, hallado; encontrar, encontrado
  to finish, finished       | acabar, acabado
  to follow, followed       | seguir, seguido
  to forget, forgotten      | olvidar, olvidado
  to forward, forwarded     | expedir, expedido
  to give, given            | dar, dado
  to go, gone               | ir, ido
  to grant, granted         | conceder, concedido
  to greet, greeted         | saludar, saludado
  to guess, guessed         | adivinar, adivinado
  to hate, hated            | odiar, odiado
  to have, had              | tener, tenido; haber, habido
  to hear, heard            | oír, oído
  to help, helped           | ayudar, ayudado
  to hope, hoped            | esperar, esperado
  to insist, insisted       | insistir, insistido
  to invite, invited        | invitar, invitado; convidar convidado
  to judge, judged          | juzgar, juzgado
  to jump, jumped           | saltar, saltado
  to keep, kept             | guardar, guardado
  to kill, killed           | matar, matado (muerto)
  to kiss, kissed           | besar, besado
  to know, known            | conocer, conocido; saber, sabido
  to laugh, laughed         | reír, reído
  to learn, learned         | aprender, aprendido
  to lend, lent             | prestar, prestado
  to lift, lifted           | levantar, levantado
  to listen, listened       | escuchar, escuchado
  to live, lived            | vivir, vivido
  to lock, locked           | cerrar, cerrado
  to look, looked           | mirar, mirado
  to lose, lost             | perder, perdido
  to love, loved            | amar, amado
  to make, made             | hacer, hecho
  to marry, married         | casar, casado
  to mention, mentioned     | mencionar, mencionado
  to milk, milked           | ordeñar, ordeñado
  to mix, mixed             | mezclar, mezclado
  to move, moved            | mover, movido
  to obey, obeyed           | obedecer, obedecido
  to oblige, obliged        | obligar, obligado
  to observe, observed      | observar, observado
  to obtain, obtained       | obtener, obtenido
  to occupy, occupied       | ocupar, ocupado
  to offer, offered         | ofrecer, ofrecido
  to open, opened           | abrir, abierto
  to order, ordered         | ordenar, ordenado; mandar, mandado
  to paint, painted         | pintar, pintado
  to pass, passed           | pasar, pasado
  to pay, paid              | pagar, pagado
  to place, placed          | colocar, colocado; poner, puesto
  to plant, planted         | plantar, plantado
  to praise, praised        | alabar, alabado
  to pray, prayed           | orar, orado; rogar, rogado
  to prefer, preferred      | preferir, preferido
  to prepare, prepared      | preparar, preparado
  to preserve, preserved    | preservar, preservado; conservar, conservado
  to prevent, prevented     | impedir, impedido
  to print, printed         | imprimir, impreso
  to produce, produced      | producir, producido
  to promise, promised      | prometer, prometido
  to propose, proposed      | proponer, propuesto
  to prove, proved          | probar, probado
  to pull, pulled           | tirar, tirado
  to punish, punished       | castigar, castigado
  to push, pushed           | empujar, empujado
  to put, put               | poner, puesto
  to quarrel, quarrelled    | reñir, reñido
  to read, read             | leer, leído
  to receive, received      | recibir, recibido
  to refuse, refused        | rehusar, rehusado
  to reign, reigned         | reinar, reinado
  to relate, related        | relatar, relatado; contar, contado
  to remain, remained       | quedar, quedado
  to remember, remembered   | recordar, recordado
  to repair, repaired       | reparar, reparado
  to repeat, repeated       | repetir, repetido
  to require, required      | necesitar, necesitado
  to resolve, resolved      | resolver, resuelto
  to rest, rested           | descansar, descansado
  to return, returned       | volver, vuelto
  to reward, rewarded       | recompensar, recompensado
  to rob, robbed            | robar, robado
  to row, rowed             | remar, remado
  to rub, rubbed            | frotar, frotado
  to run, run               | correr, corrido
  to salute, saluted        | saludar, saludado
  to satisfy, satisfied     | satisfacer, satisfecho
  to save, saved            | salvar, salvado
  to say, said              | decir, dicho
  to scratch, scratched     | rascar, rascado; arañar, arañado
  to see, seen              | ver, visto
  to seek, sought           | buscar, buscado
  to seem, seemed           | parecer, parecido
  to sell, sold             | vender, vendido
  to send, sent             | enviar, enviado; mandar, mandado
  to separate, separated    | separar, separado
  to serve, served          | servir, servido
  to sew, sewn              | coser, cosido
  to shake, shaken          | sacudir, sacudido
  to show, shown            | mostrar, mostrado
  to shut, shut             | cerrar, cerrado
  to sing, sung             | cantar, cantado
  to sleep, slept           | dormir, dormido
  to smile, smiled          | sonreir, sonreído
  to smoke, smoked          | fumar, fumado
  to speak, spoken          | hablar, hablado
  to spend, spent           | gastar, gastado
  to squander, squandered   | malgastar, malgastado
  to start, started         | salir, salido
  to stay, stayed           | quedar(se), quedado
  to steal, stolen          | robar, robado
  to study, studied         | estudiar, estudiado
  to suffer, suffered       | sufrir, sufrido
  to suffice, sufficed      | bastar, bastado
  to sup, supped            | cenar, cenado
  to suppose, supposed      | suponer, supuesto
  to suspect, suspected     | sospechar, sospechado
  to swallow, swallowed     | tragar, tragado
  to take, taken            | tomar, tomado
  to talk, talked           | charlar, charlado
  to taste, tasted          | probar, probado
  to teach, taught          | enseñar, enseñado
  to tell, told             | decir, dicho
  to thank, thanked         | agradecer, agradecido
  to think, thought         | pensar, pensado
  to tire, tired            | cansar, cansado
  to touch, touched         | tocar, tocado
  to travel, travelled      | viajar, viajado
  to try, tried             | probar, probado; procurar, procurado
  to understand, understood | entender, entendido; comprender, comprendido
  to use, used              | usar, usado
  to visit, visited         | visitar, visitado
  to walk, walked           | andar, andado
  to want, wanted           | necesitar, necesitado
  to warm, warmed           | calentar, calentado
  to wash, washed           | lavar, lavado
  to win, won               | ganar, ganado
  to wish, wished           | desear, deseado; querer, querido
  to work, worked           | trabajar, trabajado
  to write, written         | escribir, escrito


PART II.

USEFUL PHRASES.

SEGUNDA PARTE.

FRASES ÚTILES.


ENGLISH.                          |SPANISH.
                                  |
_Titles._                         |_Títulos._
                                  |
Sir, or gentleman                 |Señor, caballero
                                  |
Sirs, or gentlemen                |Señores, caballeros
                                  |
Madam                             |Señora
                                  |
Miss                              |Señorita
                                  |
A lady                            |Una señora
                                  |
Ladies                            |Señoras
                                  |
Some ladies                       |Unas (Algunas) señoras
                                  |
A young lady                      |Una señorita
                                  |
Young ladies                      |Señoritas
                                  |
Some young ladies                 |Unas (Algunas) señoritas
                                  |
                                  |
_Asking Questions._               |_Hacer Preguntas._
                                  |
What is that?                     |¿Qué es eso?
                                  |
What is this?                     |¿Qué es esto?
                                  |
What is it?                       |¿Que es?
                                  |
What do you call that?            |¿Cómo (le) llama V. a eso?
                                  |
What is the name of this?         |¿Cómo se llama esto?
                                  |
This is called....                |Esto se llama....
                                  |
What is the Spanish               |¿Cómo se dice en
for...?                           |español...?
                                  |
Tell me the Spanish               |Dígame V. como se
for this word.                    |dice esta palabra
                                  |en español.
                                  |
May I ask you if...?              |¿Me permite V. que
                                  |le pregunte si...?
                                  |
May I take the liberty            |¿Puedo permitirme
of asking you                     |preguntarle si...?
if...?                            |
                                  |
May I trouble you                 |¿Me hace V. el favor
to...?                            |de...?
                                  |
What do you want?                 |¿Qué  quiere  V.?
                                  |¿Qué pide V.?
                                  |
What do you wish to               |¿Qué desea V.? ¿Qué
have?                             |se le ofrece a V.?
                                  |
Do you hear me?                   |¿Me oye V.?
                                  |
Do you understand                 |¿Comprende V. lo que
what I say?                       |le digo?
                                  |
Yes, Sir (I do)                   |Sí, Señor (comprendo).
                                  |
No, Sir (I do not)                |No, Señor (no comprendo).
                                  |
Will you have the                 |¿Quiere V. tener la
goodness to say it                |bondad de repetirlo?
again?                            |
                                  |
What do you say?                  |¿Qué dice V.?
                                  |
What do you mean?                 |¿Qué quiere V. decir?
                                  |
What do you say to                |¿Qué dice V. de ello?
it?                               |¿Qué le parece a
                                  |V.?
                                  |
Does she understand               |¿Comprende ella lo
what we say?                      |que decimos?
                                  |
Did you speak to me?              |¿Me habló V. a mí?
                                  |
Why do you not answer?            |¿Por qué no responde
                                  |V.?
                                  |
What did they answer?             |¿Qué respondieron ellos?
                                  |
When did you hear                 |¿Cuándo oyó V. eso?
that?                             |
                                  |
Are you sure of that?             |¿Está V. seguro de
                                  |eso?
                                  |
Who told you so?                  |¿Quién se lo ha dicho
                                  |a V.?
                                  |
What does it mean?                |¿Qué quiere decir eso?
                                  |
What is the matter?               |¿Qué hay? ¿Qué pasa?
                                  |
What are you doing?               |¿Qué hace V.?
                                  |
What are you asking               |¿Qué pide V.?
for?                              |
                                  |
Whom do you ask                   |¿Por quién pregunta
for?                              |V.?
                                  |
What do you think                 |¿Qué piensa V. de
of it?                            |ello?
                                  |
What are you thinking             |¿En qué está V. pensando?
of?                               |
                                  |
Where are you going?              |¿A dónde va V.?
                                  |
Are you going there?              |¿Va V. allá?
                                  |
Are you going home?               |¿Va V. a casa?
                                  |
How far do you go?                |¿Hasta dónde va V.?
                                  |
Where do you wish to go?          |¿Dónde quiere V. ir?
                                  |
Which way shall we go?            |¿Por dónde iremos?
                                  |
Has he gone?                      |¿Se marchó?
                                  |
Where do you come from?           |¿De dónde viene V.?
                                  |
Will you come with me?            |¿Quiere V. venir conmigo?
                                  |
Will you be at home               |¿Estará V. en casa
to-night?                         |esta noche?
                                  |
When will you come?               |¿Cuándo vendrá V.?
                                  |
When do you leave                 |¿Cuándo se marcha V.
for England?                      |para Inglaterra?
                                  |
Whose stick is this?              |¿De quién es este bastón?
                                  |
Will you have it?                 |¿Lo quiere V.?
                                  |
Whose books are these?            |¿De quién son estos libros?
                                  |
Will you send them to me?         |¿Quiere V. enviármelos?
                                  |
How much will you give?           |¿Cuánto quiere V. dar (pagar)?
                                  |
How much do you want?             |¿Cuánto pide V.?
                                  |
How much do I owe you?            |¿Cuánto le debo a V.?
                                  |
What shall we do?                 |¿Qué haremos?
                                  |
I do not know what                |No sé qué hacer.
to do.                            |
                                  |
What would you advise             |¿Qué me aconseja V.
me to do?                         |que haga?
                                  |
What is to be done?               |¿Qué hacer? ¿Que se
                                  |ha de hacer?
                                  |
What is the news?                 |¿Qué noticias hay?
                                  |
Is there any news?                |¿Hay noticias?
                                  |
Have you seen the                 |¿Ha visto V. los
newspapers?                       |periódicos?
                                  |
Where is it?                      |¿Dónde está?
                                  |
Where are they?                   |¿Dónde están?
                                  |
What is the use of that?          |¿Para qué sirve eso?
                                  |
For whom is it?                   |¿Para quién es?
                                  |
What do you want me for?          |¿Para qué me quiere V.?
                                  |
Is the door open?                 |¿Está abierta la puerta?
                                  |
Are the windows shut?             |¿Están cerradas las ventanas?
                                  |
Will you allow me?                |¿Me permite V.?
                                  |
Will you do me a                  |¿Me hace V. un
favour?                           |favor?
                                  |
Will you do me the                |¿Quiere V. hacerme el
favour of...?                     |favor de...?
                                  |
Will you be kind                  |¿Quiere V. tener la
enough to...?                     |bondad de...?
                                  |
I have a favour to ask            |Tengo que pedirle a
of you.                           |V. un favor.
                                  |
Will you render me a              |¿Quiere V. prestarme
service?                          |un servicio?
                                  |
                                  |
_Thanks._                         |_Gracias._
                                  |
Thank you. Thanks.                |Doy a V. las gracias. Gracias.
                                  |
Many thanks. Thank                |Muchas gracias. Muchísimas
you very much.                    |gracias.
                                  |Mil gracias. Un
                                  |millón de gracias.
                                  |
I am very much                    |Estoy muy agradecido
obliged to you.                   |(reconocido) a V.
                                  |
I am giving you a                 |Doy a V. mucho trabajo
great deal of                     |(mucha molestia).
trouble.                          |
                                  |
I am sorry to trouble             |Siento molestarle tanto.
you (give you so                  |Siento darle
much trouble).                    |(causarle) tanta
                                  |molestia.
                                  |
No trouble at all.                |Molestia, ninguna.
                                  |
Do not mention it.                |No hay de qué.
                                  |
                                  |
_Asking the Way in_               |_Preguntar por el_
_Town._ _In the Street._          |_Camino en una Ciudad._
                                  |_En la Calle._
                                  |
Is this the way to...?            |¿Es éste el camino de...?
                                  |
Is this the way to go             |¿Es éste el camino
to...?                            |para ir a...?
                                  |
Is this the road that             |¿Es éste el camino que
leads to...?                      |conduce a...?
                                  |
Does this road lead               |¿Conduce este camino
to...?                            |a...?
                                  |
Which is the way                  |¿Por dónde se va a...?
to...?                            |
                                  |
You are going the                 |Va V. bien.
right way.                        |
                                  |
You are going the                 |Va V. mal. No va V.
wrong way.                        |bien.
                                  |
How far is it from                |¿Cuánto hay de aquí
here to...?                       |a...?
                                  |
Is it far from here               |¿Está lejos de aquí
to...?                            |el...?
                                  |
Is it very far from               |¿Está muy lejos de
here to...?                       |aquí el...?
                                  |
No, it is not far.                |No, no está lejos.
                                  |
It is scarcely two                |Hay apenas dos millas.
miles.                            |
                                  |
It is only two steps              |Sólo está a dos pasos
from here.                        |de aquí.
                                  |
It is only a short                |Está a poca distancia
distance away.                    |(a corto trecho).
                                  |
One Spanish league.               |Una legua española.
                                  |
One English mile.                 |Una milla inglesa.
                                  |
Three miles are one               |Tres millas hacen una
league (5 kilometres).            |legua (5 kilómetros).
                                  |
It is about one mile.             |Hay cosa de una milla.
                                  |
It is quite a mile from           |Hay una buena milla
here to....                       |de aquí a....
                                  |
It is not quite a mile.           |Hay apenas una milla.
                                  |
Which way am I to go?             |¿Qué camino debo seguir?
                                  |
Which way must I go?              |¿Por dónde debo ir?
                                  |
Go straight on.                   |Vaya V. todo derecho.
                                  |
Turn to the right.                |Tome V. a la derecha.
                                  |
Go to the left.                   |Tome V. a la izquierda.
                                  |
You will turn to the              |En la primera esquina
right at the first                |tomará V. a la
corner, then to                   |derecha, luego a
the left, and then                |la izquierda, y
keep straight on.                 |después irá V.
                                  |todo derecho.
                                  |
You are going a                   |Hace V. un rodeo. Va
round-about way.                  |V. descaminado
                                  |(fuera de camino).
                                  |
Pardon me, Sir, can               |V. dispense, Caballero,
you direct me to                  |¿podría V. enseñarme
the hotel "Four                   |el camino
Nations?"                         |de la fonda "Cuatro
                                  |Naciones?"
                                  |
Sir, would you have               |Señor, ¿tendría V. la
the kindness to                   |bondad de enseñarme
show me the way                   |el camino
to ... Street?                    |de la calle...?
                                  |
I have lost my way.               |Me he extraviado. He
                                  |errado el camino.
                                  |
I have lost myself in             |Me he perdido (extraviado)
these narrow                      |en estas
streets.                          |calles estrechas.
                                  |
Do you know which                 |¿Sabe V. cuál es el
is the way to the                 |camino del Teatro
Theatre Royal?                    |Real?
                                  |
I am very sorry, Sir,             |Siento mucho, Señor,
I do not know,                    |no saberlo, pero
but this policeman                |este municipal podrá
here will be                      |decírselo.
able to tell you.                 |
                                  |
How far is it from                |¿Cuánto hay de aquí
here to the Southern              |a la Estación del
Railway Station?                  |Ferrocarril del
                                  |Sur?
                                  |
Where can I find a                |¿Dónde encontraré un
cab?                              |coche?
                                  |
Is there a 'bus from              |¿Hay algún ómnibus
here to the Zoological            |de aquí al Jardín
Gardens?                          |Zoológico?
                                  |
Yes, Sir, there is the            |Sí, Señor, hay el
green 'bus which                  |ómnibus verde
runs along the                    |que pasa por los
embankment.                       |muelles.
                                  |
There is a tramway.               |Hay tranvía.
                                  |
How much is the                   |¿Cuánto se cobra?
fare?                             |¿Cuánto es?
                                  |
Is there a museum in              |¿Hay algún museo en
this town?                        |esta ciudad?
                                  |
Can you tell me where             |¿Puede V. decirme
the Picture Gallery               |dónde se halla la
is?                               |Galería de Pinturas?
                                  |
Could you show me                 |¿Podría V. enseñarme
the way to the                    |el camino de la
Royal Square?                     |Plaza Real?
                                  |
Is it far to the theatre          |¿Está lejos de aquí el
from here?                        |teatro?
                                  |
Will you have the                 |¿Quiere V. tener la
kindness to tell                  |bondad de decirme
me in which part                  |en qué parte de
of the town is the                |la ciudad se encuentra
Royal Palace?                     |el Palacio
                                  |Real?
                                  |
If you follow this                |Si sigue V. por esta
street until you                  |calle hasta llegar
come to the                       |a la catedral, verá
Cathedral, you                    |V. el palacio a su
will see the palace               |derecha.
on the right.                     |
                                  |
The theatre is on your            |El teatro está a su
left, about fifty                 |izquierda de V., a
paces from here.                  |unos cincuenta
                                  |pasos de aquí.
                                  |
Where is the post-office?         |¿Donde está el correo?
                                  |
It is not far from here;          |No está lejos de aquí;
you will get there                |siguiendo el tranvía,
in five minutes,                  |llegará V.
if you follow the                 |allí dentro de
tram-lines.                       |cinco minutos.
                                  |
Cabman, drive me                  |Cochero, lléveme a
to the Northern                   |la Estación del
Station; hurry up.                |Norte; despache
                                  |V.
                                  |
Drive faster.                     |Apriete V. el paso.
                                  |
Drive me to the                   |Lléveme V. a la Fonda
Victoria Hotel.                   |Victoria.
                                  |
I engage you by the               |Le tomaré por hora(s)
hour (by distance).               |(por carrera).
                                  |
Take me first to                  |Lléveme primero a la
St. John Street,                  |calle San Juan,
number four.                      |número cuatro.
                                  |
And now I want to go              |Y ahora quiero ir al
to the Botanical                  |Jardín Botánico.
Gardens.                          |
                                  |
How much is your                  |¿Cuánto lleva V.?
fare?                             |¿Cuánto es?
                                  |
Three pesetas, if you             |Tres pesetas, si V.
please.                           |gusta.
                                  |
                                  |
_Making Enquiries_                |_Informarse de Alguien._
_about Someone._                  |
                                  |
Will you have the                 |¿Quiere V. tener la
goodness to tell                  |bondad de decirme...?
me...?                            |
                                  |
Will you tell me, if              |¿Me hace V. el favor
you please...?                    |de decirme...?
                                  |
Where does Mr. B. live?           |¿Dónde vive el señor B.?
                                  |
Do you know Mr. B.?               |¿Conoce V. al señor B.?
                                  |
No, Sir.                          |No, Señor.
                                  |
No, Sir, I do not.                |No, Señor, no le conozco.
                                  |
I do not know anybody             |No conozco a nadie
body of that name                 |aquí que así se
here.                             |llame.
                                  |
Yes, Sir, I know him.             |Sí, Señor, le conozco.
                                  |
I know him very well.             |Le conozco muy bien.
                                  |
I have the honour of              |Tengo el honor de
his acquaintance.                 |conocerle.
                                  |
Will you favour me                |¿Tiene V. la bondad
with his address?                 |de darme sus señas?
                                  |
In what street does he            |¿En qué calle vive?
live?                             |
                                  |
He lives near....                 |Vive cerca de...
                                  |
Is it far from here?              |¿Está lejos de aquí?
                                  |
It is only a stone's throw.       |Está a tiro de piedra.
                                  |
Can you direct me to              |¿Puede V. dirigirme
his house?                        |a su casa?
                                  |
I am going that way               |Voy yo mismo por ese
myself.                           |camino.
                                  |
I will show you his house.        |Le enseñaré su casa.
                                  |
It is very far from here.         |Está muy lejos de aquí.
                                  |
In that case I will take          |En ese caso tomaré un
a cab.                            |coche.
                                  |
Call a cab.                       |Llame V. un coche.
                                  |
Drive me to No. 4, ...            |Lléveme V. a la calle
Street.                           |..., número cuatro.
                                  |
Stop at this house.               |Pare V. en esta casa.
                                  |
On the right side going           |Subiendo, a la derecha.
up.                               |
                                  |
On the left side going            |Bajando, a la izquierda.
down.                             |
                                  |
At that brick house.              |En esa casa de ladrillos.
                                  |
At that marble house.             |En esa casa de mármol.
                                  |
                                  |
_Enquiries concerning_            |_Preguntas acerca de_
_a Journey._                      |_un Viaje._
                                  |
I want to go to ...               |Quiero ir a ...
                                  |
Is the road good?                 |¿Es bueno el camino?
                                  |
It is not very bad.               |No es muy malo.
                                  |
It is shocking in                 |En invierno está malísimo.
winter.                           |
                                  |
It is pretty good at              |En esta estación está
this season.                      |bastante bueno.
                                  |
Is the road sandy?                |¿Es arenoso el camino?
                                  |
The road is wide.                 |El camino es ancho.
                                  |
I am going to book                |Voy al paradero de
my seat at the                    |diligencias para
coach office.                     |tomar mi asiento.
                                  |
I prefer going by the             |Prefiero ir en el correo.
mail.                             |
                                  |
I do not like the                 |No me gusta el vapor.
steamboat.                        |
                                  |
How much is the fare?             |¿Cuál es el precio del billete?
                                  |
Three pesetas.                    |Tres pesetas.
                                  |
How many miles is it              |¿Cuántas millas hay
from here to B.?                  |de aquí a B.?
                                  |
I did not think it was            |No creía que estuviese
so far.                           |tan lejos.
                                  |
When shall we start?              |¿Cuándo saldremos?
                                  |
To-morrow morning                 |Mañana por la mañana
at six o'clock.                   |a las seis.
                                  |
And at what o'clock               |¿Y a qué hora llegaremos
shall we reach                    |a B.?
B.?                               |
                                  |
At eight in the evening.          |A las ocho de la noche.
                                  |
Where are we to                   |¿Dónde almorzamos?
breakfast?                        |
                                  |
Where shall we dine?              |¿Dónde comeremos?
                                  |
Where shall we have tea?          |¿Dónde tomaremos el té?
                                  |
All the passengers                |Todos los pasajeros
are here.                         |están aquí.
                                  |
Let us start then.                |Pues, vamos.
                                  |
Driver, what prevents             |Cochero, ¿por qué se
you from starting?                |demora?
                                  |
At last we have started.          |Por fin estamos en camino.
                                  |
Shut the door.                    |Cierre V. la portezuela.
                                  |
Where are we?                     |¿Dónde estamos?
                                  |
What is the name of               |¿Cómo se llama esta
this village?                     |aldea?
                                  |
Does the coach stop               |¿Se para aquí la
here?                             |diligencia?
                                  |
Yes, Sir, to change               |Sí, Señor, para cambiar
the horses.                       |de tiro.
                                  |
Shall we have time for            |¿Tendremos tiempo
refreshments?                     |para tomar algún
                                  |refresco?
                                  |
At what hotel does the            |¿En qué hotel se para
coach put up?                     |la diligencia?
                                  |
At the United States              |En el Hotel de los
Hotel.                            |Estados Unidos.
                                  |
We have arrived at                |Por fin hemos llegado.
last.                             |
                                  |
Have you any baggage              |Señor, ¿tiene V. algún
to carry,                         |equipaje que llevar?
Sir?                              |
                                  |
Yes, take this trunk.             |Sí, tome V. este baúl.
                                  |
Yes, take this portmanteau.       |Sí, tome V. esta maleta.
                                  |
I want a single bedded room.      |Necesito un cuarto con cama para uno.
                                  |
At what o'clock shall             |¿A qué hora cenaremos?
we have supper?                   |
                                  |
At half-past eight.               |A las ocho y media.
                                  |
I shall go to bed early.          |Me acostaré temprano.
                                  |
I am very tired.                  |Estoy muy cansado.
                                  |
The road was very bad.            |El camino estaba muy malo.
                                  |
Why did you not                   |¿Por qué no tomó V.
choose the steamboat?             |el vapor?
                                  |
One travels by it                 |Por vapor se viaja con
much more comfortably.            |mucha más comodidad.
                                  |
I think I shall go by it          |Creo que otra vez lo
another time.                     |tomaré.
                                  |
Where is the railway              |¿Dónde está la estación
station?                          |del ferrocarril?
                                  |
Show me the booking               |Enséñeme V. el despacho
office.                           |de billetes.
                                  |
I want a ticket to Paris.         |Un billete para París.
                                  |
What class?                       |¿Qué clase?
                                  |
1st cl., 2nd cl., 3rd cl.         |Primera, segunda, tercera clase.
                                  |
Single or return?                 |¿Sencillo o de ida y vuelta?
                                  |
Is there a through                |¿Hay tren directo para...?
train to...?                      |
                                  |
May I break my                    |¿Puedo pararme en...?
journey at...?                    |
                                  |
Is there a ladies' compartment?   |¿Hay coche para señoras?
                                  |
Is there a smoking                |¿Hay coche para fumadores?
compartment?[13]                  |
                                  |
Is there a lavatory?              |¿Hay retrete?
                                  |
Can I get a seat reserved         |¿Puedo hacerme reservar
in advance                        |un asiento
from Calais?                      |anticipadamente
                                  |desde Calais?
                                  |
Certainly; what seat              |Seguramente; ¿qué
would you like?                   |asiento quiere V.?
                                  |
A corner seat facing              |Un asiento junto a la
the engine.                       |ventanilla (Un rincón),
                                  |de cara a la máquina.
                                  |
My friend wants the               |Mi amigo quiere el
seat opposite,                    |asiento de enfrente,
with back to the                  |de espaldas
engine.                           |a la máquina.
                                  |
There is an extra                 |Hay un recargo (un
charge of 2/- a                   |suplemento) que
seat to pay.                      |pagar de 2 chelines
                                  |por asiento.
                                  |
Where is the luggage-office?      |¿Dónde está el despacho
                                  |de equipajes?
                                  |
My luggage is in the              |Mi equipaje está en el
cloak-room.                       |depósito de equipajes.
                                  |
Have you the luggage-ticket?      |¿Tiene V. el talón?
                                  |
Can I have my luggage             |¿Puedo hacer facturar
registered                        |mi equipaje directamente
through to...?                    |para...?
                                  |
What is the charge?               |¿Cuánto se abona?
                                  |
What luggage does                 |¿A cuánto equipaje
my ticket entitle                 |tengo derecho con
me to take free?                  |este billete?
                                  |
When does the train               |¿A qué hora sale el
to Dover start?                   |tren para Dovres?
                                  |
From which platform?              |¿De qué andén?
                                  |
Which is the departure            |¿Cual es el andén
platform?                         |de salida?
                                  |
The arrival platform.             |El andén de llegada.
                                  |
Take your seats!                  |¡Señores viajeros al tren!
                                  |
Tickets, please.                  |Los billetes, Señores.
                                  |
Do you object to my               |¿Permite V. que abra
opening the window?               |la ventanilla?
                                  |
Is there a restaurant-car         |¿Hay vagón-restaurant
attached to                       |en este tren?
this train?                       |
                                  |
Can I get sleeping-car            |¿Puedo hacerme reservar
accommodation                     |un sitio en
reserved from                     |el coche-cama
Paris?                            |desde París?
                                  |
What extra is there to            |¿Qué recargo hay que
pay?                              |pagar?
                                  |
I hope I am not in the            |Espero que no haya
wrong train.                      |errado de tren.
                                  |
Where must I change               |¿Dónde tendré que
to get a train                    |cambiar de tren
for...?                           |para ir a...?
                                  |
How long does the                 |¿Cuánto tiempo se
train stop here?                  |para aquí el tren?
                                  |
Is there a refreshment-room?      |¿Hay fonda?
                                  |
All change here!                  |¡Cambio, Señores!
                                  |
Porter, take my luggage           |Mozo, lleve V. mi
to the                            |equipaje al vapor.
steamer.                          |
                                  |
Carry it down to the              |Póngalo en el salón
first-class saloon.               |de primera clase.
                                  |
I shall remain on deck.           |Voy a quedarme sobre cubierta.
                                  |
The sea is somewhat               |El mar está un poco
rough.                            |agitado.
                                  |
Are you a good sailor?            |¿Tiene V. pie marino?
                                  |
I have never been sea-sick,       |Nunca me he mareado,
but I must                        |pero debo decir
say I have always                 |que siempre que
crossed when the                  |he hecho la travesía
sea was calm.                     |el mar ha
                                  |estado tranquilo.
                                  |
There is Calais.                  |Allí está Calais.
                                  |
What do you intend                |¿Qué piensa V. hacer
doing in Paris?                   |en París?
                                  |
I shall see the sights            |Visitaré los puntos de
of the town.                      |interés de la
                                  |ciudad.
                                  |
Shall we hire a motor             |¿Tomaremos un automóvil
car for sight-seeing?             |para visitar
                                  |la ciudad?
                                  |
Where can we hire a               |¿Dónde podemos alquilar
motor car?                        |un automóvil?
                                  |
There are several                 |Hay varios garajes
large garages                     |importantes donde
where motor cars                  |se pueden alquilar
can be had by the                 |automóviles por
day or week.                      |día o por semana.
                                  |
What is the horsepower            |¿De cuántos caballos
of this                           |es este automóvil?
car?                              |
                                  |
What is your charge               |¿Cuánto lleva V.
for a day or a                    |(cobra V.) para un
week?                             |día o para una
                                  |semana?
                                  |
Does this price include           |¿Incluye este precio
the driver's                      |los gastos del
expenses?                         |chauffeur?
                                  |
What is the average               |¿Cual es el promedio
number of kilometres              |de kilómetros (millas)
(miles)                           |que se puede
that can be done                  |recorrer en un
in a day?                         |día?
                                  |
What make is this                 |¿De qué fábrica es
car?                              |este automóvil?
                                  |
Is it in good condition?          |¿Está en buena condición?
                                  |
Do you guarantee that             |¿Garantiza V. que no
it will not break                 |se descompondrá
down en route?                    |en camino?
                                  |
Is your driver reliable           |¿Es su chauffeur de
and experienced?                  |V. de toda confianza
                                  |y experiencia?
                                  |
                                  |
_The Custom House._               |_La Aduana._
                                  |
Where does the customs'           |¿Dónde se efectúa la
examination                       |revisión de equipaje?
take place?                       |
                                  |
Must I be present at              |¿Debo estar presente
the customs'                      |cuando se registra
examination?                      |(se visita) el equipaje?
                                  |
Must we open our                  |¿Tendremos que abrir
luggage at the                    |el equipaje en la
customs?                          |aduana?
                                  |
Have you anything to              |¿Tiene V. algo que
declare?                          |declarar?
                                  |
No, nothing.                      |No, nada.
                                  |
I have nothing but                |No llevo sino efectos
personal effects.                 |de mi uso personal.
                                  |
Would you like to see             |¿Quiere V. verlo por
for yourself?                     |sí mismo?
                                  |
These are my things.              |Estas son mis cosas.
                                  |
Here are the keys.                |Aquí están las llaves.
                                  |
Must I open this?                 |¿Debo abrir esto?
                                  |
Do you want to                    |¿Desea V. examinar
examine this?                     |esto?
                                  |
All these things are for          |Todas estas cosas son
my own use.                       |de mi propio uso.
                                  |
Have you anything                 |¿Lleva V. algo de
liable to duty?                   |pago?
                                  |
Have you any tobacco?             |¿Tiene V. algún tabaco?
                                  |
I have some (a few)               |Tengo algunos (unos
cigars and cigarettes.            |pocos) cigarros y
                                  |cigarrillos.
                                  |
What does the duty                |¿Cuánto importan los
amount to?                        |derechos?
                                  |
Will this be refunded             |¿Me reembolsarán esto
on my return?                     |a mi vuelta?
                                  |
You can close your                |Puede V. cerrar ya las
boxes.                            |maletas.
                                  |
                                  |
_Getting up._                     |_Levantarse._
                                  |
Are you up already?               |¿Está V. ya levantado?
                                  |
At what time do you               |¿A qué hora se
get up?                           |levanta V.?
                                  |
I get up at six o'clock.          |Me levanto a las seis.
                                  |
It is too early.                  |Es demasiado temprano.
                                  |
You get up very early.            |Se levanta V. muy temprano.
                                  |
I like to get up early.           |Me gusta levantarme temprano.
                                  |
It is a very good habit.          |Es muy buena costumbre.
                                  |
It is very good for the           |Es muy bueno para la
health.                           |salud.
                                  |
Get up!                           |Levántese V.
                                  |
You have been called              |Le han llamado a V.
twice.                            |dos veces.
                                  |
How sleepy you are!               |¡Qué sueño tiene V.!
                                  |
You go to bed too                 |Se acuesta V. demasiado
late.                             |tarde.
                                  |
Let me sleep.                     |Déjeme V. dormir.
                                  |
It is too early to get            |Es demasiado temprano
up yet.                           |todavía para
                                  |levantarse.
                                  |
Too early?                        |¿Demasiado temprano?
                                  |
Do you know the time?             |¿Sabe V. qué hora es?
                                  |
It cannot be late.                |No puede ser tarde.
                                  |
It may be five o'clock.           |Las cinco, tal vez.
                                  |
Five o'clock? It is               |¿Las cinco? Son las
half past eight.                  |ocho y media.
                                  |
I did not think it was            |No creía que fuese
so late.                          |tan tarde.
                                  |
I am going to get up              |Voy a levantarme
directly.                         |ahora mismo.
                                  |
Make haste and dress              |Vístase V. pronto.
yourself.                         |
                                  |
I shall not be long.              |No tardaré mucho.
                                  |
How did you sleep last            |¿Cómo ha pasado V.
night?                            |la noche?
                                  |
I slept well.                     |He dormido bien.
                                  |
I never woke all                  |No he despertado en
night.                            |toda la noche.
                                  |
I did not sleep well.             |No he dormido bien.
                                  |
I could not sleep.                |No he podido dormir.
                                  |
Let us go for a little            |Vamos a dar una
walk.                             |pequeña vuelta.
                                  |
Shall we have time                |¿Tendremos tiempo
before breakfast?                 |antes de almorzar?
                                  |
We shall have a good              |Tendremos lo menos
hour.                             |una hora.
                                  |
                                  |
_The Bath._                       |_El Baño._
                                  |
Tell me, waiter, is               |Dígame, mozo, ¿se
there a bath to be                |puede tomar aquí
had here?                         |un baño?
                                  |
Yes, Sir, we have                 |Sí, Señor, tenemos
a cold and warm                   |baño frío y caliente,
bath, and a                       |y también
shower-bath.                      |ducha.
                                  |
I want another towel              |Necesito otra toalla y
and a piece of                    |un pedazo de
soap.                             |jabón.
                                  |
See that the water is             |Vea V. que el agua
not too hot.                      |no esté demasiado
                                  |caliente.
                                  |
Waiter, a little more             |Mozo, un poco más de
hot water.                        |agua caliente.
                                  |
Enough! Thanks.                   |¡Basta! Gracias.
                                  |
                                  |
_Dressing._                       |_Vestirse._
                                  |
Give me my stockings.             |Deme V. mis medias.
                                  |
Bring me my shoes.                |Tráigame V. mis zapatos.
                                  |
Clean them better;                |Límpielos V. mejor;
they are not properly             |no están bien
cleaned.                          |limpiados.
                                  |
My linen is damp; air             |Mi ropa está húmeda;
it a little.                      |séquela V. un
                                  |poco al fuego.
                                  |
Has the washerwoman               |¿Ha traído la lavandera
brought my linen?                 |mi ropa?
                                  |
Pay her bill.                     |Páguele V. su cuenta.
                                  |
Give me some warm                 |Deme V. un poco de
(cold) water.                     |agua caliente
                                  |(fría).
                                  |
Where is the soap?                |¿Dónde está el jabón?
                                  |
Go and fetch me a                 |Vaya V. a buscarme
towel.                            |una toalla.
                                  |
Bring me my razors.               |Tráigame V. mis navajas.
                                  |
Do you want a pin?                |¿Necesita V. un alfiler?
                                  |
Give me a needle.                 |Deme V. una aguja.
                                  |
Give me a collar and              |Deme V. un cuello y
a necktie.                        |una corbata.
                                  |
Where are my gloves?              |¿Dónde están mis guantes?
                                  |
I cannot find them.               |No puedo encontrarlos.
                                  |
They cannot be lost.              |No pueden haberse perdido.
                                  |
Brush my hat.                     |Cepílleme V. el sombrero.
                                  |
                                  |
_Breakfast._                      |_El Desayuno._ _El_
                                  |_Almuerzo._[14]
                                  |
Have you had your                 |¿Ha almorzado V. ya?
breakfast?                        |
                                  |
Not yet.                          |Todavía no.
                                  |
You come just in time.            |V. llega precisamente a tiempo.
                                  |
You will breakfast                |Almorzará V. con
with us.                          |nosotros.
                                  |
Is breakfast ready?               |¿Está pronto el almuerzo?
                                  |
It will soon be ready.            |Estará pronto de aquí a poco.
                                  |
Everybody is up.                  |Todos están levantados.
                                  |
They are only waiting             |Sólo esperan a V.
for you.                          |
                                  |
I am coming down directly.        |Bajo en seguida.
                                  |
I beg your pardon for             |Perdone V. el haberle
having kept you                   |hecho esperar.
waiting.                          |
                                  |
Do you drink tea or               |¿Toma V. té o café?
coffee ?                          |
                                  |
Here is coffee.                   |Aquí tiene V. café.
                                  |
There is tea.                     |Ahí tiene V. té.
                                  |
You have your chocolate           |Tiene V. ahí cerca su
near you.                         |chocolate.
                                  |
What do you prefer?               |¿Qué prefiere V.?
                                  |
What do you like best?            |¿Qué le gusta a V. más?
                                  |
I prefer coffee.                  |Prefiero el café.
                                  |
Will you give me                  |¿Quiere V. darme
some chocolate?                   |chocolate?
                                  |
Is your coffee sweet              |¿Tiene bastante azúcar
enough?                           |su café de V.?
                                  |
It is excellent.                  |Es excelente.
                                  |
There are rolls.                  |Ahí tiene V. panecillos.
                                  |
There is toast.                   |Ahí tiene V. tostadas.
                                  |
Would you mind passing            |¿Me hace V. el favor
me the butter?                    |de la manteca?[15]
                                  |
Pass me the bread, if             |Hágame V. el favor
you please.                       |de pasarme el pan.
                                  |
The tea is rather weak.           |El té está un poco flojo.
                                  |
I like it strong.                 |Me gusta fuerte.
                                  |
I drink it without sugar.         |Lo tomo sin azúcar.
                                  |
What may I offer you?             |¿Qué puedo ofrecerle?
                                  |
Nothing more, thank you.          |Nada más, gracias.
                                  |
Do you take cream                 |¿Toma V. crema con
with coffee?                      |el café?
                                  |
There are some fresh              |Ahí tiene V. huevos
eggs; allow me to                 |frescos; permítame
give you one.                     |V. que le
                                  |ofrezca uno.
                                  |
Will you have some                |¿Quiere V. un poco
cold meat?                        |(un trocito) de
                                  |carne fiambre?
                                  |
Will you have a sausage?          |¿Quiere V. una salchicha?
                                  |
I have made an excellent          |He almorzado muy
breakfast.                        |bien.
                                  |
What do you prefer--tea           |¿Cuál prefiere V.--té
or coffee?                        |o café?
                                  |
Will you be kind                  |¿Tiene V. la bondad
enough to give                    |de darme una taza
me a cup of tea?                  |de té?
                                  |
Is it to your liking?             |¿Está a su gusto de V.?
                                  |
I should like a little            |Quisiera un poco más
more sugar.                       |de azúcar.
                                  |
What will you take--ham           |¿Qué quiere V. tomar--jamón,
or a piece                        |o un
of roast chicken?                 |poco de pollo
                                  |asado?
                                  |
May I offer you a cup             |¿Puedo ofrecerle una
of coffee with                    |taza de café con
milk?                             |leche?
                                  |
Thanks, but I prefer              |Gracias, prefiero el
my coffee without                 |café sin leche.
milk.                             |
                                  |
Please help yourself              |Sírvase V. tomar un
to a little more.                 |poco más.
                                  |
No, thank you, I have             |No, mil gracias, he
made a very good                  |almorzado  muy
breakfast.                        |bien.
                                  |
                                  |
_Lunch or Dinner._                |_El Almuerzo_[16] _o la_
                                  |_Comida_.
                                  |
It will soon be two               |Pronto serán las dos.
o'clock.                          |
                                  |
It is almost two o'clock.         |Son casi las dos.
                                  |
It is nearly two o'clock.         |Son cerca de las dos.
                                  |
It is half past one.              |Es la una y media.
                                  |
Let us return home.               |Volvamos a casa.
                                  |
What time shall we                |¿A qué hora almorzaremos
have lunch (dinner)               |(comeremos)
to-day?                           |hoy?
                                  |
The cloth will be laid            |La mesa se pondrá
presently.                        |luego.
                                  |
Lunch is on the table.            |El almuerzo está ya en la mesa.
                                  |
Let us sit down.                  |Sentémonos.
                                  |
No, not yet.                      |No, todavía no.
                                  |
Do you expect company?            |¿Espera V. gente?
                                  |
I expect Mr. and Mrs. B.          |Espero al señor y la señora B.
                                  |
Have you ordered dinner?          |¿Ha dado V. órdenes para la comida?
                                  |
What have you ordered?            |¿Qué ha pedido V. ?
                                  |
What shall we have                |¿Qué tendremos para
for dinner?                       |la comida?
                                  |
Shall we have any fish?           |¿Tendremos pescado?
                                  |
There was no fish in              |No había pescado en
the market.                       |el mercado.
                                  |
Mr. and Mrs. B. will              |El señor y la señora
not come.                         |B. no vendrán.
                                  |
Let us begin lunch.               |Empecemos el almuerzo.
                                  |
What may I offer you?             |¿Qué puedo ofrecerle a V.?
                                  |
Will you have some soup?          |¿Quiere V. sopa?
                                  |
Will you take some soup?          |¿Quiere V. tomar sopa?
                                  |
If you please.                    |Si V. gusta.
                                  |
Thank you.                        |Gracias.
                                  |
Kindly pass me a little           |Hágame V. el favor
beef.                             |de pasarme un
                                  |poco de carne.
                                  |
It looks very nice.               |Parece muy buena.
                                  |
This fowl is delicious.           |Este polio es delicioso.
                                  |
Will you have a wing?             |¿Quiere V. un alón?
                                  |
If you please.                    |Si V. gusta.
                                  |
I will thank you for              |Le agradecería a V.
some gravy.                       |un poco de salsa.
                                  |
Shall I give you some             |¿Quiere V. que le
vegetables?                       |sirva legumbres?
                                  |
Will you have some salad?         |¿Quiere V. ensalada?
                                  |
I will take some salad.           |Tomaré ensalada.
                                  |
Will you have a little            |¿Quiere V. un poco
sauce?                            |de salsa?
                                  |
May I offer you a                 |¿Le daré a V. un
piece of this roast               |pedacito de esta
beef?                             |carne asada?
                                  |
I will take a small               |Tomaré un poquito.
piece.                            |
                                  |
Will you have it well             |¿Lo quiere V. bien
done?                             |asado?
                                  |
Will you have it                  |¿Lo quiere V. poco
underdone?                        |asado?
                                  |
Rather well done.                 |Bien asado.
                                  |
I like it underdone.              |Lo prefiero poco asado.
                                  |
Did I help you to your            |¿Le he servido a V.
liking?                           |a su gusto?
                                  |
It is excellent.                  |Es excelente.
                                  |
It is as tender as a              |Es tan tierna como un
chicken.                          |pollo.
                                  |
Gentlemen, allow me               |Señores, permítanme
to drink your                     |Vs. que beba a su
health.                           |salud.
                                  |
This claret is delicious.         |Este clarete es delicioso.
                                  |
Let us have a bottle              |Tomemos una botella
of champagne.                     |de champaña.
                                  |
How do you like it?               |¿Cómo le gusta a V.?
                                  |
It has a very pleasant            |Tiene un gusto muy
flavour.                          |agradable.
                                  |
Have you any good                 |¿Tiene V. buen queso?
cheese?                           |
                                  |
Give me a small piece             |Deme V. un pedacito
of cheese.                        |de queso.
                                  |
Which will you have?              |¿Cuál quiere (prefiere) V.?
                                  |
English cheese.                   |El queso inglés.
                                  |
You are giving me                 |Me da V. demasiado.
too much.                         |
                                  |
Give me only half of it.          |Deme V. sólamente la mitad.
                                  |
Cut that in two.                  |Corte V. eso en dos.
                                  |
Bring the dessert.                |Traiga V. los postres.
                                  |
We have had a good lunch.         |Hemos almorzado muy bien.
                                  |
Let us taste these                |Probemos estos melocotones.
peaches.                          |
                                  |
                                  |
These pears are delicious.        |Estas peras son deliciosas.
                                  |
You may clear the table.          |Puede V. levantar la mesa.
                                  |
Bring us some wine.               |Traiga V. vino.
                                  |
Lunch is over.                    |Se acabó el almuerzo.
                                  |
Dinner is announced               |Señores, nos avisan
gentlemen; let us                 |que la comida está
go into the                       |servida; pasemos
dining-room.                      |al comedor.
                                  |
A little more soup, Sir?          |¿Un poco más de sopa, Señor?
                                  |
I will take a little              |Tomaré un poco más,
more if you                       |si V. gusta.
please.                           |
                                  |
What wine would you               |¿Cuál vino prefiere V.,
like, claret or                   |clarete o vino de
port?                             |Oporto?
                                  |
Your health, Sir.                 |A la salud de V., Señor.
                                  |
Yours, Sir.                       |A la de V.
                                  |
Do you care for this              |¿Le gusta a V. este
wine?                             |vino?
                                  |
I like this wine very             |Este vino me gusta
much.                             |mucho.
                                  |
Allow me to help you              |Permítame V. que le
to a little of this               |sirva un poco de
shoulder of lamb.                 |esta espalda de
                                  |cordero.
                                  |
And what can I help               |¿Y qué puedo ofrecerle
you to?                           |a V.?
                                  |
I will take a little              |Tomaré un poco de
beef, it looks very               |vaca, parece muy
good.                             |buena.
                                  |
Will you kindly pass              |¿Tiene V. la bondad
me the cruet?                     |de pasarme las
                                  |vinagreras?
                                  |
A potato, if you please.          |Una patata, si V. gusta.
                                  |
Which part of this                |¿De qué parte de este
duck may I help                   |pato quiere V.
you to?                           |que le sirva?
                                  |
I will take a leg,                |Tomaré una pierna, si
please.                           |V. gusta.
                                  |
Will you kindly pass              |¿Me hace V. el favor
the mustard?                      |de pasarme la
                                  |mostaza?
                                  |
With much pleasure.               |Con mucho gusto.
                                  |
I shall be delighted.             |Con el mayor placer.
                                  |
Madam, allow me to                |Señora, permítame V.
help you to some                  |que le sirva un
of this whiting.                  |poco  de  esta
                                  |pescadilla.
                                  |
Madam, permit your                |Señora, permita a su
servant to drink                  |servidor de V.
your health.                      |brindar a su salud.
                                  |
Yours, my friend.                 |A la de V., amigo.
                                  |
Which cheese do you               |¿Cuál queso prefiere
like best?                        |V.?
                                  |
Give me a little bread            |Deme V. un poco de
and butter.                       |pan con manteca
                                  |(mantequilla).
                                  |
Do you like grapes,               |¿Le gustan a V. las
or would you                      |uvas, o prefiere
prefer an apple?                  |V. una manzana?
                                  |
These oranges are                 |Estas naranjas son
very sweet.                       |muy dulces.
                                  |
Let me offer you a                |Permítame V. ofrecerle
cigar. Do you                     |un cigarro
prefer Havanas or                 |(un tabaco, un
Manillas?                         |puro). ¿Prefiere
                                  |V. habanos o filipinos?
                                  |
This is an excellent              |Este cigarro es excelente.
cigar.                            |
                                  |
Take another.                     |Tome V. otro.
                                  |
Waiter, the bill of               |Mozo,[17] tráiganos V.
fare, please.                     |la lista (denos V.
                                  |la carta).
                                  |
Here it is, Sir. What             |Aquí está, Señor.
would you like,                   |¿Qué desean Vs.
gentlemen?                        |tomar?
                                  |
What time is table                |¿A qué hora es la
d'hôte?                           |mesa redonda?
                                  |
Have you dinners at               |¿Tienen Vs. comidas
fixed price?                      |a precio fijo?
                                  |
We will dine at fixed             |Comeremos por cubierto.
price.                            |
                                  |
We are going to order             |Vamos a pedir a la
from the bill of                  |carta.
fare.                             |
                                  |
Have you a table free             |¿Hay vacante alguna
near the window?                  |mesa cerca de la
                                  |ventana?
                                  |
This is the only one              |Esta es la única que
disengaged.                       |no se ha tomado.
                                  |
What soup have you?               |¿Qué sopa tiene V.?
                                  |
Bring us some vegetable           |Tráiganos sopa de
soup.                             |menestras (de
                                  |yerbas).
                                  |
Is there any fish                 |¿Hay listo algún pescado?
ready?                            |
                                  |
Let us have some leg              |Tráiganos espalda de
of mutton, with                   |carnero con patatas
fried potatoes and                |fritas y
cauliflower for                   |coliflor para dos,
two, and half a                   |y media ave con
fowl with boiled                  |patatas cocidas.
potatoes.                         |
                                  |
Waiter, a bottle of               |Mozo, una botella de
English beer.                     |cerveza inglesa.
                                  |
I am very sorry, Sir,             |Siento mucho, Señor,
we haven't any                    |no tenemos cerveza,
beer, but we have                 |pero tenemos
splendid wine.                    |muy buen
                                  |vino.
                                  |
Well then, a bottle               |Pues entonces, una
of claret.                        |botella de clarete.
                                  |
Waiter, two coffees.              |Mozo, dos cafés.
                                  |
Black coffee. White               |Café solo. Café con
coffee.                           |leche.
                                  |
A cognac.                         |Un coñac. Una copita
                                  |de coñac.
                                  |
Nothing more for me.              |Para mí, nada más.
                                  |
Have you any good                 |¿Tienen Vs. buenos
cigars?                           |cigarros?
                                  |
Yes, Sir, we have                 |Sí, Señor, tenemos
superior Havanas.                 |habanos superiores.
                                  |
I don't care for these;           |No me gustan éstos;
they are too                      |son demasiado
strong (too mild).                |fuertes (demasiado
                                  |flojos).
                                  |
Let us have some                  |Tráiganos cigarrillos.
cigarettes.                       |
                                  |
The matches, please.              |Haga V. el favor de
                                  |las cerillas.
                                  |
You have forgotten to             |Se ha olvidado V. de
bring the sugar.                  |traernos el azúcar.
                                  |
Waiter, the bill.                 |Mozo, la cuenta.
                                  |
Here it is, Sir.                  |Aquí la tiene V., Señor.
                                  |
How much have we to pay?          |¿Cuánto tenemos que pagar?
                                  |
Here is your account,             |Aquí tiene V. su
Sir.                              |cuenta, Señor.
                                  |
You may keep the change.          |Guárdese V. la vuelta.
                                  |
                                  |
_Tea._                            |_El Té_[18].
                                  |
It is five o'clock.               |Son las cinco.
                                  |
Tea will be ready in a            |El té estará pronto al
moment.                           |instante.
                                  |
Do you hear the bell?             |¿Oye V. la campanilla?
                                  |
Let us go down.                   |Bajemos.
                                  |
Sit down, Gentlemen.              |Siéntense Vs., Señores.
                                  |
I like tea without sugar.         |Me gusta el té sin azúcar.
                                  |
And I without cream.              |Y a mí sin crema.
                                  |
I like my tea strong.             |Me gusta el té fuerte (cargado).
                                  |
I prefer it weak.                 |Yo lo prefiero flojo (claro).
                                  |
Allow me to give you              |Permítame V. darle
another cup.                      |otra taza.
                                  |
I never take more                 |Nunca tomo más que
than one cup.                     |una taza.
                                  |
Will you have some milk?          |¿Quiere V. leche?
                                  |
Bring some more boiling           |Traiga V. más agua
water.                            |hirviente.
                                  |
This water is not hot             |Esta agua no está
enough.                           |bastante caliente.
                                  |
There is fresh butter.            |Ahí tiene V. manteca fresca.
                                  |
This bread is good.               |Este pan es bueno.
                                  |
I will willingly take             |Tomaré con gusto
half a cup more.                  |media taza más.
                                  |
Will you have some                |¿Quiere V. tostada?
toast?                            |
                                  |
I shall come and take             |Mañana iré a tomar el
tea to-morrow at                  |té en su casa de
your house.                       |V.
                                  |
I shall be very glad              |Me alegraré mucho de
to see you.                       |verle a V.
                                  |
We take tea exactly               |Tomamos el té a las
at five.                          |cinco en punto.
                                  |
                                  |
_Supper._                         |_La Cena._
                                  |
Will you stay and sup             |¿Quiere V. quedarse
with us?                          |a cenar con nosotros?
                                  |
Have supper with us               |Cene V. con nosotros
without ceremony.                 |sin ceremonia.
                                  |
Bring a plate, and a              |Traiga V. un plato y
knife and fork for                |un cubierto para
this gentleman.                   |este señor.
                                  |
No, really.                       |No, de veras. No,
                                  |muchas gracias.
                                  |
I never take supper.              |Nunca ceno.
                                  |
Well, sit near the                |Bueno, pues siéntese
table.                            |V. junto a la
                                  |mesa.
                                  |
We will talk.                     |Hablaremos. Conversaremos.
                                  |Charlaremos.
                                  |
You will take a glass             |¿V. tomará, por supuesto,
of wine, will you                 |una copa
not?                              |de vino?
                                  |
You cannot refuse that.           |Eso no lo puede V. rehusar.
                                  |
Do you like oysters?              |¿Le gustan a V. las ostras?
                                  |
I am very fond of them.           |Me gustan mucho.
                                  |
I will take a few.                |Tomaré algunas.
                                  |
How do you like them?             |¿Cómo le gustan a V.?
                                  |
They are good and                 |Son buenas y muy
very fresh.                       |frescas.
                                  |
Will you take a slice             |¿Quiere V. un poco de
of cold turkey?                   |pavo frío?
                                  |
No, thank you.                    |No, gracias.
                                  |
I am satisfied with               |Me contento con un
my piece of bread                 |poco de pan con
and butter.                       |manteca.
                                  |
Will you take a glass             |¿Quiere V. tomar un
of beer?                          |vaso de cerveza?
                                  |
Willingly; I do not               |De buena gana; no me
like tea.                         |gusta el té.
                                  |
In England the beer               |En Inglaterra la cerveza
is excellent.                     |es excelente.
                                  |
I like beer.                      |Me gusta la cerveza.
                                  |
It is an agreeable and            |Es una bedida agradable
wholesome drink.                  |y sana.
                                  |
                                  |
_Evening._                        |_La Tarde._
                                  |
It is getting late.               |Se hace tarde.
                                  |
It is almost time to              |Es casi hora de acostarse.
go to bed.                        |
                                  |
Mr. A. has not come               |El señor A. no ha
home yet.                         |vuelto todavía.
                                  |
Will he be late?                  |¿Tardará en volver?
                                  |
He generally comes                |Generalmente vuelve
home early.                       |temprano.
                                  |
I hear a knock.                   |Oigo llamar.
                                  |
Very likely it is he.             |Es él, probablemente.
                                  |
Go and see.                       |Vaya V. a ver.
                                  |
Yes, it is he.                    |Sí, es él.
                                  |
I hope I have not kept            |Espero que no le haya
you waiting.                      |hecho esperar.
                                  |
Not in the least.                 |Ni un momento.
                                  |
It is only ten o'clock.           |Son sólamente las diez.
                                  |
We never go to bed                |Nunca nos acostamos
before half-past                  |antes de las diez
ten.                              |y media.
                                  |
How did you like your             |¿Cómo le ha gustado a
walk this evening?                |V. su paseo de esta tarde?
                                  |
Very much.                        |Muchísimo.
                                  |
It is a charming evening.         |Es una tarde deliciosa.
                                  |
Are you not tired?                |¿No está V. cansado?
                                  |
Not very.                         |No mucho.
                                  |
Will you not rest a               |¿No quiere V. descansar
little?                           |un poco?
                                  |
No, thank you.                    |No, gracias.
                                  |
I am going to bed.                |Voy a acostarme.
                                  |
Are you going already?            |¿Se marcha V. ya?
                                  |
It is not late.                   |No es tarde.
                                  |
It is early yet.                  |Es temprano todavía.
                                  |
It is time to go to bed.          |Ya es hora de acostarse.
                                  |
I do not like to go to            |No me gusta acostarme
bed late.                         |tarde.
                                  |
I like to go to bed               |Me gusta acostarme temprano.
early.                            |
                                  |
I wish you good night.            |Le deseo a V. muy
                                  |buenas noches.
                                  |
I wish you a good                 |Deseo que pase V.
night's rest.                     |bien la noche (que
                                  |descanse V. bien,
                                  |que duerma V. bien).
                                  |
                                  |
_Going to Bed._                   |_Acostarse._
                                  |
Let me see the room               |Déjeme V. ver el
I am to sleep in.                 |cuarto donde voy a dormir.
                                  |
Will you show me my               |¿Quiere V. mostrarme
bed-room?                         |mi cuarto?
                                  |
I should like a room              |Quisiera un cuarto en
on the first floor.               |el primer piso.
                                  |
Give me a quiet room.             |Deme V. un cuarto quieto.
                                  |
Your room is quite ready.         |Su cuarto de V. está listo.
                                  |
Well, show me the                 |Bueno, enséñeme V.
way; I will follow                |el camino; yo le
you.                              |seguiré.
                                  |
Nobody sleeps above you.          |Nadie duerme en el cuarto encima.
                                  |
Close the window-shutters.        |Cierre V. los postigos.
                                  |
Bring my baggage up               |Suba V. mi equipaje a
to my room.                       |mi cuarto.
                                  |
Where have you put                |¿Dónde ha puesto V.
our things?                       |nuestras cosas?
                                  |
Are the beds well aired?          |¿Están las camas bien secadas?
                                  |
These sheets feel damp.           |Estas sábanas parcem húmedas.
                                  |
I must have others.               |Quiero otras.
                                  |
Warm my bed.                      |Caliente V. mi cama.
                                  |
It is very cold.                  |Hace mucho frío.
                                  |
I shall want another              |Necesitaré otra manta.
blanket.                          |
                                  |
This is too light.                |Esta es demasiado ligera.
                                  |
Give me another pillow.           |Deme V. otra almohada.
                                  |
Put some water in my basin.       |Eche V. agua en mi palangana.
                                  |
Will you have a nightlight?       |¿Quiere V. una lamparilla?
                                  |
No, that would prevent            |No, no me dejaría
my sleeping.                      |dormir.
                                  |
Take away the candle.             |Lleve V. la vela.
                                  |
I will put it out myself.         |La apagaré yo mismo.
                                  |
Before you go, draw               |Antes de marcharse,
the curtains.                     |corra V. las cortinas.
                                  |
Is there a bell in this           |¿Hay campanilla en
room?                             |este cuarto?
                                  |
At what time do you               |¿A qué hora quiere V.
wish to get up tomorrow?          |levantarse mañana?
                                  |
When am I to call                 |¿A qué hora quiere V.
you?                              |que le llame?
                                  |
Exactly at six.                   |A las seis en punto.
                                  |
I must set off early.             |Tengo que marcharme temprano.
                                  |
I will not fail to come           |No dejaré de venir a
and wake you.                     |despertarle.
                                  |
You may rely upon me.             |V. puede contar conmigo.
                                  |
I should like to have             |Quiero mi cuenta.
my bill.                          |
                                  |
It is ready.                      |Está pronta. Está hecha.
                                  |
Tell your master to               |Diga V. a su amo que
send me the bill.                 |me mande la cuenta.
                                  |
I will settle with him            |Arreglaré con él esta
to-night.                         |noche.
                                  |
What have I to pay?               |¿Cuánto tengo que pagar?
                                  |
What do I owe you?                |¿Cuánto le debo a V.?
                                  |¿Cuánto debo?
                                  |
I have brought your bill.         |He traído su cuenta.
                                  |
It amounts to ten pesetas.        |Sube a diez pesetas.
                                  |
It is very high.                  |Es mucho.
                                  |
Here is your money                |Aquí tiene V. su dinero.
                                  |
It is all right.                  |Está bien.
                                  |
Now I am going to sleep.          |Ahora quiero dormir.
                                  |
Does the door shut properly?      |¿Cierra bien la puerta?
                                  |
Is there a lock?                  |¿Hay cerradura?
                                  |
Where is the key?                 |¿Dónde está la llave?
                                  |
Is there a bolt?                  |¿Hay cerrojo?
                                  |
Sir, I wish you a good            |Señor, deseo que pase
night's rest.                     |V. bien la noche.
                                  |
This bed is very hard.            |Esta cama está muy dura.
                                  |
I don't think I shall             |No creo que pueda
be able to sleep.                 |dormir.
                                  |
                                  |
_A Meeting._                      |_Un Encuentro._
                                  |
Good morning, Sir.                |Buenos días,[19] Señor.
                                  |
Good afternoon, Madam.            |Buenas tardes, Señora.
                                  |
Good evening.                     |Buenas tardes.
                                  |
Good night.                       |Buenas noches.
                                  |
I wish you good morning.          |Le deseo a V. muy buenos días.
                                  |
How are you? How                  |¿Cómo está V.?  ¿Cómo
do you do?                        |lo pasa V.?
                                  |(Fam.: ¿Qué tal?)
                                  |
Are you well?                     |¿Está V. bien?
                                  |
I am very well, thank             |Estoy muy bien, gracias,
you, and you?                     |¿y V.?
                                  |
Quite well.                       |Muy bien. Sin novedad.
                                  |Perfectamente.
                                  |
I am glad to find you             |Me alegro de verle a
in good health.                   |V. en buena salud.
                                  |
How is your mother?               |¿Cómo está su madre de V.?
                                  |
How is your family?               |¿Cómo está su familia de V.?
                                  |
They are all well.                |Todos están bien.
                                  |
You look very well.               |V. tiene muy buena cara.
                                  |
You have never                    |Nunca ha tenido V.
looked better.                    |mejor cara (aspecto,
                                  |semblante).
                                  |
You do not look well.             |V. no parece estar bueno.
                                  |
You look ill.                     |V. parece enfermo.
                                  |
Are you unwell?                   |¿Está V. malo?
                                  |
I am not very well.               |No estoy muy bien.
                                  |
I feel indisposed.                |Me siento indispuesto.
                                  |
I suffer a great deal.            |Padezco mucho.
                                  |
I have been obliged               |He tenido que guardar
to keep my bed.                   |cama.
                                  |
I have had a bad cold.            |He tenido un fuerte constipado.
                                  |
I have a very bad cough.          |Tengo mucha tos.
                                  |
I have the toothache.             |Tengo dolor de muelas.
                                  |
I have a headache.                |Tengo dolor de cabeza.
                                  |
I have a sore throat.             |Tengo mal de garganta.
                                  |
I did not sleep a wink            |No he cerrado los ojos
(all night).                      |(en toda la noche).
                                  |
I feel greatly relieved.          |Me siento muy aliviado.
                                  |
I am a little better this         |Estoy un poco mejor
morning.                          |esta mañana.
                                  |
I hope it will be nothing.        |Espero que no será nada.
                                  |
I am very sorry to                |Siento mucho saberlo.
hear it.                          |
                                  |
I am sorry, but I hope            |Lo siento, pero espero
it will not have                  |que no tenga consecuencias
serious consequences.             |graves.
                                  |
What! is it you?                  |¡Cómo! ¿es V.?
                                  |
Is it really you?                 |¿Es V., de veras?
                                  |
You quite surprise me.            |V. me sorprende mucho.
                                  |
I did not expect to               |No esperaba encontrarle
meet you here.                    |a V. aquí.
                                  |
I am very glad to see             |Me alegro mucho de
you.                              |verle a V.
                                  |
When did you return?              |¿Cuándo volvió V.?
                                  |
I thought you were in...          |Yo creía que V. estaba en...
                                  |
I came home last night.           |Volví anoche.
                                  |
How did you come?                 |¿Cómo vino V.?
                                  |
I came by the express.            |Vine por el expreso.
                                  |
You came rather unexpectedly.     |V. vino un poco antes
                                  |de lo que se le
                                  |esperaba.
                                  |
I thought I would                 |Pensaba quedarme todo
stay all the summer               |el verano en...
at...                             |
                                  |
What made you return              |¿Qué le ha hecho a
so soon?                          |V. volver tan
                                  |pronto?
                                  |
Business called me                |Tuve que volver para
here.                             |los negocios.
                                  |
How did you like your             |¿Cómo le ha gustado
journey?                          |a V. el viaje?
                                  |
I liked it very well.             |Me ha gustado mucho.
                                  |
I have had a very                 |He hecho un viaje
pleasant journey.                 |muy agradable.
                                  |
When shall I have the             |¿Cuándo tendré el
pleasure of seeing                |gusto de verle a
you at my house?                  |V. en mi casa?
                                  |
When will you come                |¿Cuándo vendrá V. a
and dine with us?                 |comer con nosotros?
                                  |
I cannot say.                     |No puedo decírselo.
                                  |
I will come one of                |Vendré un día de estos.
these days.                       |
                                  |
Come to-day.                      |Venga V. hoy.
                                  |
I cannot.                         |No puedo.
                                  |
I have some business              |Tengo que hacer.
to do.                            |
                                  |
I will call on you.               |Iré a verle a V.
                                  |
I will call on you                |Iré a verle a V. mañana.
some time to-morrow.              |
                                  |
We shall be very                  |Tendremos mucho
pleased to see                    |gusto en verle a
you.                              |V.
                                  |
Good morning, Sir.                |Buenos días, Señor.
                                  |
I hope you are well,              |Espero encontrarle a
Madam.                            |V. bien, Señora.
                                  |
Very well, thank you,             |Muy bien, gracias, ¿y
and how are you,                  |V., Señor, cómo
Sir?                              |está?
                                  |
I am very well, thank             |Estoy muy bien, gracias.
you.                              |
                                  |
Be seated.                        |Siéntese V.
                                  |
Please take a seat.               |Sírvase V. sentarse.
                                  |
Take a seat.                      |Tome V. asiento.
                                  |
I have not been very              |No he estado muy
well lately, but I                |bien últimamente,
feel better now.                  |pero ahora estoy
                                  |mejor.
                                  |
I have caught cold to-day.        |Me he resfriado hoy.
                                  |
I hope you will soon              |Espero que pronto se
be better.                        |pondrá V. bueno.
                                  |
I am much obliged                 |Le agradezco mucho
to you for your                   |su amabilidad.
kindness.                         |
                                  |
Ah, here is Mr. C.;               |¡Ah! aquí viene el
I am very glad to                 |señor C.; me alegro
see you.                          |de verle a V.
                                  |
Allow me to introduce             |Permítame V. que le
Mr. C. to you.                    |presente al señor
                                  |C.
                                  |
I am delighted to                 |Me alegro de conocer
make your acquaintance,           |a V., Señor.
Sir.                              |
                                  |
Pleased to meet you.              |Mucho gusto en conocer a V.
                                  |
How is your brother?              |¿Cómo está su hermano
                                  |de V.?
                                  |
He enjoys excellent               |Goza de muy buena
health, and does                  |salud, y no sabe
not know what                     |lo que es el estar
sickness is.                      |enfermo.
                                  |
Yes, doubtless; but he            |Sí, sin duda; pero
must take care of                 |debe cuidarse.
himself. We don't                 |Sólo apreciamos
know the value of                 |la buena salud
health till we have               |cuando la hemos
lost it.                          |perdido.
                                  |
He has not been well              |Hace una semana que
for a week, and                   |no está bien, y no
was not able to                   |ha podido salir
go out all that                   |durante todo ese
time.                             |tiempo.
                                  |
I hope he is not seriously        |Espero que su enfermedad
ill.                              |no sea
                                  |grave.
                                  |
I hope your father is             |Espero que su padre
well. I have not                  |de V. se encuentre
had the pleasure                  |bien. No he tenido
of seeing him                     |el gusto de
since his return                  |verle desde su
from London.                      |vuelta de Londres.
                                  |
He is first-rate. I               |Está admirablemente.
think he will be                  |Creo que estará
here directly.                    |aquí dentro de
                                  |poco.
                                  |
How do you like my                |¿Cómo le gustan a V.
new rooms?                        |mis nuevos cuartos?
                                  |
I think you very fortunate        |Creo que V. ha tenido
in having                         |suerte en encontrar
found such a                      |tan hermosa
splendid house.                   |casa.
                                  |
What are you going                |¿Qué piensa V. hacer
to do this evening?               |esta tarde?
                                  |
I have to take my sister          |Tengo que acompañar
to the theatre.                   |a mi hermana al
Are you coming                    |teatro. ¿Vendrá
too?                              |V. también?
                                  |
There is nothing I                |No hay nada que me
should enjoy more.                |gustaría más.
                                  |
Very well, good-bye               |Muy bien, pues hasta
till then.                        |entonces.
                                  |
Good-bye.                         |Adiós.
                                  |
                                  |
_A Visit._                        |_Una Visita._
                                  |
There is someone                  |Alguien llama.
knocking.                         |
                                  |
Go and see who it is.             |Vaya V. a ver quien es.
                                  |
Go and open the door.             |Vaya V. a abrir la puerta.
                                  |
It is Mr. B.                      |Es el señor B.
                                  |
Good morning, Madam,              |Buenos días, Señora;
how do you do?                    |¿cómo está V.?
                                  |
Very well, thank you,             |Muy bien, gracias, ¿y
and you?                          |V.?
                                  |
All right, thank you.             |Sin novedad, gracias.
                                  |
I have not seen you               |Hace mucho que no
for a long time.                  |le veo.
                                  |
You are quite a                   |Se vende V. muy caro.
stranger.                         |
                                  |
Will you stay and dine            |¿Quiere V. quedarse
with us?                          |a comer con nosotros?
                                  |
No, thank you, I cannot           |¿No, gracias, no puedo
stay; I only                      |quedarme; he venido
came down to                      |sólamente
know how you                      |para saber cómo
were.                             |estaba V.
                                  |
How is Mrs. B.?                   |¿Cómo está la señora B.?
                                  |
Thank you very much,              |Muchas gracias, Señora;
Madam; Mrs. B.                    |la señora B.
is quite well, and                |está muy bien, y
she would certainly               |me habría acompañado,
have accompanied                  |por cierto,
me if                             |to, si su hermana
her sister had not                |no hubiera venido
come from Paris                   |de París para hacerle
to pay her a short                |una corta
visit.                            |visita.
                                  |
I am sorry she did not            |Siento que no le haya
accompany you;                    |acompañado; hubiera
I should have                     |tenido mucho
been very pleased                 |gusto en conocer
to make Miss S's                  |a la señorita S.
acquaintance.                     |
                                  |
Miss S. was very tired            |La señorita S. estaba
after her journey,                |muy cansada después
but she will not                  |de su viaje;
leave ... without                 |pero no saldrá de
coming to see                     |... sin venir a
you.                              |verle a V.
                                  |
Tell her how pleased              |Dígale V. que tendré
I shall be to see                 |mucho gusto en
her; I am generally               |verla; generalmente
at home                           |estoy en
every day after                   |casa todos los
four o'clock, except              |días después de
Thursdays,                        |las cuatro de la
and never go out                  |tarde, excepto los
in the evening.                   |jueves,[20] y nunca
Have you been in                  |salgo de noche.
the country with                  |¿Ha estado V. en
your family?                      |el campo con su
                                  |familia?
                                  |
Yes, Madam; we only               |Sí, Señora; sólo hace
returned a fortnight              |una quincena que
ago.                              |estamos de vuelta.
                                  |
How was the weather               |¿Qué tiempo ha hecho
while you were                    |durante su estancia
away?                             |allí?
                                  |
We were very fortunate;           |Hemos tenido mucha
during                            |suerte; durante
the three weeks                   |las tres semanas
we remained at                    |que hemos estado
X. the weather                    |en X. ha hecho
was extremely fine.               |un tiempo hermosísimo.
                                  |
Have you heard from               |¿Ha tenido V. noticias
your brother lately?              |de su hermano
                                  |últimamente?
                                  |
Yes, I had a letter               |Sí, ayer recibí carta
from him yesterday.               |de él.
                                  |
Have you seen the                 |¿Ha visto V. el
last number of                    |último número
the _Illustrated_                 |del _Mundo Ilustrado_?[21]
_World_?                          |
                                  |
Yes, Madam; I am                  |Si, Señora; estoy
a subscriber to                   |abonado a esa
that illustrated paper.           |ilustración.
                                  |
Is there anything                 |¿Hay algo de interés
specially interesting             |especial en este
in this number?                   |número?
                                  |
There are very good               |Hay muy buenos dibujos
sketches from the                 |del corresponsal
correspondent at                  |en el teatro
the seat of war.                  |de la guerra.
                                  |
I must go.                        |Tengo que marcharme.
                                  |
Are you going already?            |¿Se marcha V. ya?
                                  |
You are in a great hurry.         |V. tiene mucha prisa.
                                  |
Why are you in such               |¿Por qué tiene V. tanta
a hurry?                          |prisa?
                                  |
I have a great many               |Tengo muchas cosas
things to do.                     |que hacer.
                                  |
Surely you can stay               |V. puede quedarse un
a little longer.                  |poco más, seguramente.
                                  |
I am very sorry I cannot          |Siento no poder quedarme
stay any                          |más; tengo
longer; I must                    |cita con el señor
meet Mr. T. at                    |T. para las cuatro
half-past four;                   |y media ; me quedaré
but I will stay                   |más otra vez
longer another time.              |(en otra ocasión).
                                  |
I thank you for your              |Gracias por su visita.
visit.                            |
                                  |
                                  |
_Departure._                      |_Despedirse._
                                  |
It is time to go.                 |Es hora de marcharme.
                                  |
I must leave you.                 |Tengo que dejarle a V.
                                  |
We must part.                     |Debemos separarnos.
                                  |
I must take leave of you.         |Es preciso que me despida de V.
                                  |
Shall I have the pleasure         |¿Tendré el gusto de
of seeing you                     |volver a verle a
again?                            |V. ?
                                  |
Shall we meet again?              |¿Nos volveremos a ver?
                                  |
Good-bye.                         |Adiós. (Fam.: Abur).
                                  |
Good-bye.                         |Que V. siga bien.
                                  |
Till we meet again.               |Hasta la vista. Hasta más ver.
                                  |
Good-bye for the present.         |Hasta luego.
                                  |
Your servant, Sir.                |Servidor de V., Señor.
                                  |
Your servant, Madam.              |Servidor de V., Señora.
                                  |
Your humble servant.              |Beso a V. la mano,
                                  |Caballero. A los
                                  |pies de V., Señora.[22]
                                  |
I wish you good morning.          |Le deseo a V. muy
                                  |buenos días.
                                  |
I wish you good evening.          |Le deseo a V. muy
                                  |buenas tardes.
                                  |
I wish you good                   |Le deseo a V. muy
night.                            |buenas noches.
                                  |
My compliments to                 |Muchas cosas a su
your brother.                     |hermano de V.
                                  |
Give my kind regards              |Dé V. memorias de mi
to your sister.                   |parte a su hermana.
                                  |
Present my respects               |Presente V. mis respetos
to your mother.                   |a su señora
                                  |madre.
                                  |
Present my respects               |Muchos recuerdos a
to your aunt.                     |su señora tía.
                                  |
Give my kind regards              |Dé V. mis recuerdos
to your wife.                     |a su señora.
                                  |
Remember me to all                |Recuerdos (Memorias,
at home.                          |Expresiones) a todos
                                  |en casa.
                                  |
I will not fail to do so.         |No faltaré.
                                  |
                                  |
_Going and Coming._               |_Ir y Venir._
                                  |
Where are you going?              |¿A dónde va V.?
                                  |
I am going home.                  |Voy a casa.
                                  |
I am coming from                  |Vengo de casa de V.
your house.                       |
                                  |
I came from him.                  |Venía de casa de é1.
                                  |
I am going to his house.          |Voy a casa de él.
                                  |
I shall be at home.               |Estaré en casa.
                                  |
You will find him at              |Le encontrara V. en
his house.                        |casa.
                                  |
I came from your                  |Venia de casa de su
father's.                         |padre de V.
                                  |
I shall go to-morrow              |Mañana iré a casa de
to my friend's.                   |mi amigo.
                                  |
Where do you come from?           |¿De dónde viene V.?
                                  |
I come from Mr. B's.              |Vengo de casa del señor B.
                                  |
I was to go to Paris.             |Debía ir a París.
                                  |
I shall perhaps go to             |Iré tal vez a España.
Spain.                            |
                                  |
I am going away; it               |Me voy; ya es hora.
is time.                          |
                                  |
I am going to take a              |Voy a dar un paseo.
walk.                             |
                                  |
I was going to church.            |Iba a la iglesia.
                                  |
Will you come with me?            |¿Quiere V. venir conmigo?
                                  |
Where do you wish to go?          |¿A dónde quiere V. ir?
                                  |
Where shall we go?                |¿A dónde iremos?
                                  |
We will go for a walk.            |Iremos a pasear.
                                  |
Let us call on Mrs. F.            |Vamos a ver a la señora F.
                                  |
Let us rather go to               |Vamos antes al Museo.
the Museum.                       |
                                  |
Let us go this way.               |Vamos por aquí.
                                  |
Give me your arm.                 |Deme V. el brazo.
                                  |
Let us cross the road.            |Atrevesemos la calle.
                                  |Pasemos a la otra
                                  |acera.
                                  |
Mind the motor-cars.              |Cuidado con los automóviles.
                                  |
Which way shall we go?            |¿Por dónde iremos?
                                  |
Any way you please.               |Por donde V. quiera.
                                  |
Let us go for a walk.             |Vamos a dar un paseo.
                                  |
I have no objection.              |No me opongo.
                                  |
Let us call on your               |Tomemos de paso a
brother on our                    |su hermano de V.
way.                              |
                                  |
Is Mr. B. at home?                |¿Está en casa el señor B.?
                                  |
Is Mrs. C. at home?               |¿Está en casa la
                                  |señora C.? La
                                  |señora C. ¿está?
                                  |
She has just gone out.            |Acaba de salir.
                                  |
He has gone out.                  |Ha salido.
                                  |
He is not at home.                |No está en casa.
                                  |
Can you tell me where             |¿Puede V. decirme a
he has gone?                      |dónde ha ido?
                                  |
I cannot tell you exactly.        |No puedo decírselo precisamente.
                                  |
I think he has gone               |Creo que ha ido a ver
to see his sister.                |a su hermana.
                                  |
Do you know when                  |¿Sabe V. cuando volverá?
he will return?                   |
                                  |
No, Sir, he did not               |No, Señor, no dijo
say anything                      |nada al salir.
when he went                      |
out.                              |
                                  |
He may be back soon.              |Es posible que vuelva pronto.
                                  |
Tell him to come and see me.      |Dígale V. que venga a verme.
                                  |
I will come again to-morrow.      |Volveré mañana.
                                  |
When must I call again            |¿Cuándo debo volver
to find him                       |para encontrarle
in?                               |en casa?
                                  |
Call again at four o'clock.       |Vuelva V. a las cuatro.
                                  |
Did you return late?              |¿Volvió V. tarde?
                                  |
They have returned from...        |Han vuelto de...
                                  |
How long will it be               |¿Cuánto (tiempo) tardará
before you come                   |V. en volver ?
back?                             |
                                  |
I shall come back at              |Volveré a las diez lo
ten o'clock at the                |más tarde.
latest.                           |
                                  |
Will you come back again?         |¿Volverá V.?
                                  |
What will you gain by it?         |¿Qué provecho sacará V. de ello?
                                  |
You will get nothing by it.       |V. no sacará nada de ello.
                                  |
When did you return               |¿Cuándo volvió V.
from the country?                 |del campo?
                                  |
Come back as soon                 |Vuelva V. tan pronto
as you can.                       |como pueda.
                                  |
Come back quickly.                |Vuelva V. pronto.
                                  |
How much does that                |¿A cuánto sube eso?
come to?                          |¿Cuánto importa?
                                  |
I shall see you on my             |Le veré a V. a mi
return.                           |vuelta.
                                  |
When I had returned               |Cuándo había vuelto
home...                           |a casa...
                                  |
I must return home.               |Debo volver a casa.
                                  |
I shall go to ... tomorrow.       |Mañana iré a...
                                  |
I will not fail to go             |No dejaré de ir allá.
there.                            |
                                  |
I will go with you.               |Le acompañaré.
                                  |
You go too fast.                  |V. anda con demasiada
                                  |prisa.
                                  |
I will go the first               |Iré en la primera
opportunity.                      |oportunidad.
                                  |
So far so good.                   |Hasta ahora, todo va bien.
                                  |
How far shall we go?              |¿Hasta dónde iremos?
                                  |
Go in front.                      |Vaya V. delante.
                                  |
I will go there from              |Iré allá de cuando en
time to time.                     |cuando.
                                  |
Do you believe that               |¿Cree V. que irá allá?
he will go there?                 |
                                  |
I intend going there.             |Pienso ir allá.
                                  |
I go there twice a week.          |Voy allá dos veces a la semana.
                                  |
Will he go with you?              |¿Irá con V.?
                                  |
I believe he has gone             |Creo que ha ido a casa.
home.                             |
                                  |
All goes well.                    |Todo va bien.
                                  |
I am going away.                  |Me voy.
                                  |
I went there twice.               |Fuí allá dos veces.
                                  |
She has gone into                 |Ella ha ido al campo.
the country.                      |
                                  |
Are you going to...?              |¿Va V. a...?
                                  |
It will soon be time              |Pronto será hora de
to start.                         |partir.
                                  |
He has been gone an hour.         |Hace una hora que se marchó.
                                  |
Come up here quickly.             |Suba V. pronto.
                                  |
Come as early as you              |Venga V. tan pronto
please.                           |como quiera.
                                  |
Do not fail to go there.          |No deje V. de ir allá.
                                  |
I shall come and see              |Vendré a verle a V.
you to-morrow                     |mañana sin falta.
for certain.                      |
                                  |
                                  |
_Exigencies of Life._             |_Exigencias de la Vida._
                                  |
I am (feel) hungry.               |Tengo hambre.
                                  |
I am very hungry.                 |Tengo mucha hambre.
                                  |
I am dying with hunger.           |Me muero de hambre.
                                  |
I am thirsty.                     |Tengo sed.
                                  |
I am very thirsty.                |Tengo mucha sed.
                                  |
I am dying with thirst.           |Me muero de sed.
                                  |
I could drink with                |Bebería con gusto.
pleasure.                         |
                                  |
Give me something                 |Deme V. algo que
to drink.                         |beber.
                                  |
Give me a glass of water.         |Deme V. un vaso de agua.
                                  |
I am very tired.                  |Estoy muy cansado.
                                  |
I am very much fatigued.          |Estoy muy fatigado.
                                  |
I am cold.                        |Tengo frío.
                                  |
My hands are cold.                |Tengo las manos frías.
                                  |
I am warm.                        |Tengo calor.
                                  |
I am sleepy.                      |Tengo sueño.
                                  |
I think I shall sleep             |Creo que dormiré bien.
well.                             |
                                  |
I am overcome with                |Me estoy cayendo
sleep.                            |(cayendo muerto)
                                  |de sueño.
                                  |
I wish I were in bed.             |Quisiera estar en la cama.
                                  |
I have slept well.                |He dormido bien.
                                  |
I have slept badly.               |He dormido mal.
                                  |
I could not get to sleep.         |No he podido dormir.
                                  |
I have not been able              |No he podido cerrar
to close my eyes                  |los ojos en toda
all night.                        |la noche.
                                  |
                                  |
_The Fire._                       |_El Fuego._
                                  |
What a poor fire!                 |¡Qué mal fuego!
                                  |
You have not taken                |V. no ha cuidado del
care of the fire.                 |fuego.
                                  |
You have not kept                 |V. no ha sostenido el
the fire up.                      |fuego.
                                  |
You have let the fire             |V. ha dejado apagarse
out.                              |el fuego.
                                  |
It is not quite out.              |No está del todo apagado.
                                  |
It must be lighted                |Es preciso encenderlo
again.                            |de nuevo.
                                  |
Come and make up                  |Venga V. a arreglar
the fire.                         |el fuego.
                                  |
What are you looking for?         |¿Qué busca V.?
                                  |
I am looking for the              |Busco las tenazas.
tongs.                            |
                                  |
Here they are in the              |Aquí están en el
corner.                           |rincón.
                                  |
Where are the bellows?            |¿Dónde está el fuelle?
                                  |
Go and fetch the bellows.         |Vaya V. a buscar el fuelle.
                                  |
Blow the fire.                    |Sople V. el fuego.
                                  |
Do not blow so hard.              |No sople V. tan fuerte.
                                  |
Put a few shavings under.         |Ponga V. debajo algunas virutas.
                                  |
Now put on two or                 |Ahora ponga V. dos
three pieces of                   |o tres pedazos de
wood.                             |leña.
                                  |
It will soon draw.                |Pronto prenderá (arderá).
                                  |
Is there any coal in              |¿Hay carbón en el
the scuttle?                      |cubo?
                                  |
Take the shovel and               |Tome V. la pala y
put some coal on                  |ponga carbón en
the fire.                         |el fuego.
                                  |
Do not put on too                 |No ponga V. demasiado
much at a time.                   |de una vez.
                                  |
If you put on too                 |Si pone V. demasiado,
much, you will                    |apagará el fuego.
put the fire out.                 |
                                  |
You have almost                   |Casi ha apagado V.
smothered the                     |el fuego.
fire.                             |
                                  |
Raise it up with the              |Levántelo V. con el
poker.                            |atizador.
                                  |
It will give it a little          |Eso le dará un poco
air.                              |de aire.
                                  |
The fire begins to                |El fuego principia a
blaze.                            |arder.
                                  |
Now the fire is very              |Ahora tenemos un
good.                             |buen fuego.
                                  |
You have made it up               |Lo ha arreglado V.
again very well.                  |muy bien.
                                  |
Which do you prefer--a            |¿Cuál prefiere V.--un
coal fire, or a                   |fuego de carbón o
wood fire?                        |un fuego de leña?
                                  |
I prefer a wood fire.             |Prefiero un fuego de leña.
                                  |
I prefer a coal fire.             |Yo prefiero un fuego de carbón.
                                  |
A wood fire does not              |Un fuego de leña no
give so much heat.                |da tanto calor.
                                  |
It is some trouble to             |Da también algún trabajo
keep up too.                      |para conservarlo.
                                  |
Do you burn your                  |¿Quema V. su carbón
coal in a grate?                  |en una reja?
                                  |
No, in a stove.                   |No, en una estufa.
                                  |
I do not like stoves.             |No me gustan las estufas.
                                  |
I like to see the blaze.          |Me gusta ver las llamas.
                                  |
                                  |
_Marketing._                      |_Compras._
                                  |
I must go to market.              |Es preciso que vaya yo al mercado.
                                  |
I shall buy some chickens.        |Compraré pollos.
                                  |
Perhaps a pair of ducks.          |Tal vez un par de patos.
                                  |
Here is a couple of               |Aquí hay un par de
nice ducks.                       |patos buenos.
                                  |
Have you fresh eggs?              |¿Tiene V. huevos frescos?
                                  |
How many pounds of                |¿Cuántas libras de
butter do you                     |manteca  quiere
want?                             |V.?
                                  |
I have left something             |He dejado algo en
at home.                          |casa.
                                  |
I must go back.                   |Tengo que volver.
                                  |
Mary, you will finish             |Maria, tú[23] acabarás
marketing.                        |las compras.
                                  |
Get three pounds of               |Compra tres libras de
butter, if it is                  |manteca, si es
good.                             |buena.
                                  |
As you come back,                 |Al volver, pasa por la
call at the butcher's.            |carnicería.
                                  |
What meat shall I                 |¿Qué carne quiere V.
order?                            |que encargue?
                                  |
Tell him to send a                |Dile que mande un
sirloin for to-day.               |lomo para hoy.
                                  |
For to-morrow two or              |Para mañana dos o
three ribs of beef.               |tres costillas de vaca.
                                  |
And for the day after,            |Y para pasado mañana
a leg of mutton.                  |una pierna de carnero.
                                  |
I should like to have             |Quisiera un pecho de
a breast of veal.                 |ternera.
                                  |
If there is none, take            |Si no lo hay, toma un
a loin of veal.                   |lomo de ternera.
                                  |
Do not forget a                   |No olivides un cuarto
quarter of lamb.                  |de cordero.
                                  |
A leg of mutton.                  |Una pierna de carnero.
                                  |
A calf's head.                    |Una cabeza de ternera.
                                  |
A neck of mutton.                 |Un pescuezo de carnero.
                                  |
Ask him for a good                |Pídele una buena molleja.
sweet-bread.                      |
                                  |
See whether he has                |Ve si tiene una buena
a nice ox-tongue.                 |lengua de buey.
                                  |
Tell him to send all              |Dile que mande todo
at once.                          |en seguida.
                                  |
Tell him to send the              |Dile que mande la
bill with it.                     |cuenta al mismo
                                  |tiempo.
                                  |
Do you wish me to                 |¿Quiere V. que compre
buy any fish?                     |pescado?
                                  |
Yes, I forgot to mention it.      |Si, olvidé decírtelo.
                                  |
Is there any fish at the          |¿Hay pescado en el
market?                           |mercado?
                                  |
There is plenty of fish.          |Hay mucho pescado.
                                  |
There is scarcely any fish.       |No hay casi ningún pescado.
                                  |
What fish is there?               |¿Qué pescado hay?
                                  |
There are herrings                |Hay arenques y escombros.
and mackerel.                     |
                                  |
Buy a plaice.                     |Compra una platija.
                                  |
Will you have a salmon?           |¿Quiere V. un salmón?
                                  |
I prefer fresh cod.               |Prefiero el bacalao fresco.
                                  |
I have seen a fine turbot.        |He visto un rodaballo hermoso.
                                  |
What is the price of              |¿A cómo se venden
soles?                            |los lenguados?
                                  |
Two shillings a pound.            |A dos chelines la libra.
                                  |
Is there any shell-fish?          |¿Hay mariscos?
                                  |
Shell-fish are now in             |Los mariscos están
season.                           |ahora en sazón.
                                  |
Buy also a dozen                  |Compra también una
eggs.                             |docena de huevos.
                                  |
                                  |
_The Walk._                       |_El Paseo._
                                  |
Shall we take a little            |¿Quiere V. que demos
walk?                             |una pequeña vuelta?
                                  |
With pleasure.                    |Con mucho gusto.
                                  |
Allow me to go and                |Permítame V. ir a
fetch my hat.                     |buscar mi sombrero.
                                  |
I will be with you in             |Estaré con V. al
a minute.                         |instante.
                                  |
I am at your service.             |Estoy a las ordenes de V.
                                  |
We will go when you like.         |Iremos cuando V. quiera.
                                  |
The weather is very               |Hace un tiempo muy
fine at present,                  |hermoso en este
and I think it will               |momento, y creo
remain so all day.                |que lo hará durante
                                  |todo el día.
                                  |
Which way shall we go?            |¿Por donde iremos?
                                  |
Let us go across the              |Atravesemos los campos.
fields.                           |
                                  |
I do not like walking             |No me gusta pasearme
on the high                       |en el camino real.
road.                             |
                                  |
There is always a                 |Hay siempre mucho
great deal of                     |polvo.
dust.                             |
                                  |
The rain has laid the             |La lluvia ha batido un
dust a little.                    |poco el polvo.
                                  |
Let us cross the meadow.          |Atravesemos el prado.
                                  |
It is a very pleasant             |Es un camino muy
way.                              |agradable.
                                  |
Under this large oak              |Bajo esta encina
we shall be sheltered             |grande estaremos
from the                          |abrigados del sol.
sun.                              |
                                  |
Shall we cross this               |¿Quiere V. que atravesemos
field?                            |este campo?
                                  |
Is there a thoroughfare           |¿Se puede atravesar
across this                       |este campo?
field?                            |¿Hay vía pública
                                  |a través de este
                                  |campo?
                                  |
Let us take this path.            |Vamos por esta senda.
                                  |
Is this the nearest               |¿Es éste el camino
way (to go)                       |más corto para
home?                             |(ir a) casa?
                                  |
It is not late.                   |No es tarde.
                                  |
Let us walk a little              |Paseémonos un poco
longer.                           |más.
                                  |
I should like to be               |Quisiera volver a
home early.                       |casa temprano.
                                  |
We are not far from               |No estamos lejos de
the house.                        |la casa.
                                  |
We shall be there in              |Estaremos allá en
less than half an                 |menos de media
hour.                             |hora.
                                  |
We shall be back at               |Estaremos de vuelta a
seven.                            |las siete.
                                  |
Are you going to                  |¿Va V. a quedarse en
stay indoors all                  |casa todo el día?
day?                              |
                                  |
No, my friend, I was              |No, amigo, pensaba
just thinking of                  |(estaba pensando)
having a walk in                  |en dar una vuelta
the park.                         |en el parque.
                                  |
Will you come with me?            |¿Quiere V. venir conmigo?
                                  |
With pleasure.                    |Con mucho gusto.
                                  |
We are having beautiful           |Hace un tiempo delicioso,
weather, and                      |y no hay
there is no doubt                 |duda que toda la
that all the fashionable          |gente de buen
people will be assembled          |tono se encontrará
there.                            |allí.
                                  |
Let us go.                        |Vamos.
                                  |
Well, then, let us go.            |Pues entonces vamos (vámonos).
                                  |
Let us be off, then.              |Pues, andando.
                                  |
Is this gentleman an              |Este señor que le ha
acquaintance of                   |saludado a V., ¿es
yours--the one                    |conocido suyo?
who took off his                  |
hat?                              |
                                  |
Oh, yes, he is a friend           |Ah, sí, es amigo mío;
of mine; I will                   |le presentaré a V.
introduce him to                  |con mucho gusto.
you with pleasure.                |
                                  |
Your friend is a very             |Su amigo de V. es un
agreeable man.                    |hombre muy agradable.
                                  |
Yes, I like him very              |Sí, le quiero mucho;
much; he knows                    |conoce a todo el
everybody  and                    |mundo y ha viajado
has travelled in                  |por todas
all parts of Europe.              |partes de Europa.
                                  |
Then your friend                  |Entonces su amigo de
must know several                 |V. debe saber
foreign languages.                |varias lenguas
                                  |extranjeras.
                                  |
He is reported to                 |Se dice que habla
speak half a                      |media docena de
dozen languages.                  |lenguas.
                                  |
What a fortunate                  |¡Qué hombre tan
man! I should be                  |feliz! Estaría muy
very pleased if I                 |contento si pudiera
could speak half                  |hablar la mitad
as many.                          |de ellas.
                                  |
Do you know this lady?            |¿Conoce V. a esta señora?
                                  |
I much regret I do not.           |Siento mucho que no.
                                  |
Yes. she is a friend              |Sí, es una amiga de
of my younger                     |mi hermana menor.
sister.                           |
                                  |
That is fortunate.                |¡Qué suerte! Señor
Mr. B. I am                       |B., me alegro de
happy to see you.                 |verle. Espero se
I trust you are                   |encuentre bien.
well.                             |
                                  |
Where have you been               |¿Dónde ha estado V.
all this time?                    |todo este tiempo?
                                  |
When did you arrive?              |¿Cuándo llegó V.?
                                  |
I arrived yesterday,              |Llegué ayer, después
after a few weeks'                |de un viaje de
travelling in                     |algunas semanas
Spain.                            |en España.
                                  |
When will you be                  |¿Cuándo estará V. de
back?                             |vuelta? ¿Cuándo
                                  |volverá V.?
                                  |
In a few weeks.                   |Dentro de pocas semanas.
                                  |
Don't forget to look              |No olvide V. venir a
me up.                            |verme.
                                  |
I shall have much                 |Lo haré con mucho
pleasure in doing                 |gusto.
so.                               |
                                  |
Have you been away?               |¿Ha estado V. ausente?
                                  |
Only for a few days;              |Algunos días sólamente;
I was in Madrid.                  |he estado en Madrid.
                                  |
And how have you                  |¿Y cómo lo ha pasado
been getting on?                  |V.?
                                  |
Very well; I met                  |Muy bien; encontré
some friends.                     |algunos amigos.
                                  |
I must go and see                 |Debo ir a ver a mi
my uncle to-night.                |tío esta noche.
                                  |
Pardon me, I have                 |Dispense V., quiero
a few words to                    |decir una palabra
say to my friend                  |a este amigo.
here.                             |
                                  |
Will you be kind                  |¿Quiere V. tener la
enough to give                    |bondad de saludar
my compliments                    |de mi parte al
to Mr. D.?                        |señor D.?
                                  |
With the greatest                 |Con el mayor placer.
pleasure. I am                    |Voy a casa para
going home to                     |comer.
dinner.                           |
                                  |
Adieu, till we meet again.        |Adiós, hasta la vista.
                                  |
Good-bye.                         |Adiós.
                                  |
                                  |
_In the Garden._                  |_En el Jardín._[24]
                                  |
Would you like to                 |¿Quiere V. dar una
take a walk in                    |vuelta en el jardín?
the garden?                       |
                                  |
With great pleasure.              |Con mucho gusto.
                                  |
I like gardens very much.         |Me gustan mucho los jardines.
                                  |
Let us go into the                |Pasemos primero al
fruit-garden first.               |huerto.
                                  |
There is a fine show              |Hay abundancia de
of plums this                     |ciruelas este año.
year.                             |
                                  |
What a quantity of                |¡Qué de manzanas
apples there will                 |habrá!
be!                               |
                                  |
Yes, if one may judge             |Si, a juzgar por las
by the blossom.                   |flores.
                                  |
The apricots will be              |Los albaricoques serán
very fine this                    |muy buenos
year.                             |este año.
                                  |
These peaches look well.          |Estos melocotones parecen buenos.
                                  |
You will have plenty              |Tendrá V. muchas
of apples.                        |manzanas.
                                  |
Cherries and strawberries         |Las cerezas y las
are now                           |fresas están ahora
in their prime.                   |en su mejor punto.
                                  |
They will soon be over.           |Pronto se pasarán.
                                  |
These grapes are quite ripe.      |Estas uvas están enteramente maduras.
                                  |
These pears are very juicy.       |Estas peras son muy jugosas.
                                  |
All fruit is very early           |Toda la fruta es muy
this season.                      |tempranera este
                                  |año (en la estación
                                  |actual).
                                  |
The espaliers especially.         |Especialmente las de las espalderas.
                                  |
And how are the trees             |¿Y cómo están los
in your orchard?                  |árboles de su
                                  |huerto?
                                  |
They are laden with fruit.        |Están cargados de fruta.
                                  |
Now let us go into                |Vamos  ahora  al
the flower-garden.                |jardín.
                                  |
You have not yet                  |V. no ha visto todavía
seen my flowers.                  |mis flores.
                                  |
Come and see my                   |Venga V. a ver mis
flowers, they are                 |flores, son hermosas.
beautiful.                        |
                                  |
The garden begins to              |El jardín principia a
look pleasant.                    |presentar buen aspecto.
                                  |
The flowers come in               |Las flores vienen en
abundance.                        |abundancia.
                                  |
The tulips have been              |Hace ya algún tiempo
in blossom some                   |que los tulipanes
time.                             |están en flor.
                                  |
The narcissus will                |Los narcisos estarán
soon come out.                    |pronto en flor.
                                  |
What a fine bed you               |¡Qué hermoso cuadro
have of them !                    |de ellos tiene V.!
                                  |
The hyacinths are                 |Los jacintos están ya
nearly over.                      |casi pasados.
                                  |
What do you call this             |¿Cómo llama V. a esta
flower?                           |flor?
                                  |
What a beautiful                  |¡Qué hermosa dalia
double dahlia!                    |doble!
                                  |
Here is a fine cactus.            |Aquí tiene V. un hermoso cacto.
                                  |
Are you fond of carnations?       |¿Le gustan a V. los
                                  |claveles (claveles
                                  |dobles)?
                                  |
Yes, but I do not like            |Sí, pero no me gusta
the smell.                        |el olor.
                                  |
Here are some very                |Aquí tiene V. unos
fine ones.                        |muy buenos.
                                  |
I like the odour of the           |Me gusta el olor de
violet.                           |la violeta.
                                  |
I prefer the scent of             |Prefiero el olor de las
roses.                            |rosas.
                                  |
You have not seen                 |V. no ha visto mis
my sweet peas.                    |guisantes de olor.
                                  |
They are astonishingly            |Son hermosísimos.
beautiful.                        |
                                  |
You have a very fine              |V. tiene una hermosa
collection of                     |colección de flores.
flowers.                          |
                                  |
You keep your garden              |V. tiene su jardín muy
very neat.                        |bien arreglado.
                                  |
Your garden is perfectly          |Su jardín de V. está
well kept.                        |en muy buen estado.
                                  |
Let us see your                   |Vamos a ver su huerta
kitchen-garden.                   |de V.
                                  |
How everything grows!             |¡Cómo brota todo!
                                  |
The rain has done a               |La lluvia ha hecho
great deal of                     |mucho bien.
good.                             |
                                  |
There was a great                 |Hacía mucha falta.
need of it.                       |
                                  |
We need more.                     |Nos hace falta más.
                                  |
What a quantity of                |¡Qué cantidad de coles!
cabbages!                         |
                                  |
What fine cauliflowers!           |¡Qué hermosas coliflores!
                                  |
Here is a fine bed of             |¡Tiene V. aquí un hermoso
asparagus.                        |plantel de
                                  |espárragos.
                                  |
I am very fond of it.             |Me gustan mucho.
                                  |
I like artichokes nearly          |Me gustan casi tanto
as well.                          |las alcachofas.
                                  |
These peas are in                 |Estos guisantes están
blossom already.                  |ya en flor.
                                  |
I have some in pod                |Tengo algunos en
in another place.                 |cáscara en otro
                                  |sitio.
                                  |
Have you planted any              |¿Ha plantado V. habas?
beans?                            |
                                  |
You will have some                |Las tendrá V. muy
very early.                       |temprano.
                                  |
What are these?                   |¿Qué son éstos?
                                  |
They are carrots and              |Son zanahorias y nabos.
turnips.                          |
                                  |
What have you there?              |¿Que tiene V. allí?
                                  |
They are truffles.                |Son trufas.
                                  |
I had never seen any              |No las había visto
before.                           |hasta ahora.
                                  |
Are these onions?                 |¿Son éstas cebollas?
                                  |
No, they are leeks.               |No, son puerros.
                                  |
They are very much                |Se parecen mucho a
like onions.                      |las cebollas.
                                  |
I see you have all                |Veo que tiene V. toda
sorts of salad.                   |clase de ensalada.
                                  |
Here is lettuce.                  |Aquí tiene V. lechuga.
                                  |
This is endive.                   |Esta es escarola.
                                  |
I do not see any celery.          |No veo apio.
                                  |
It is in another part             |Está en otra parte de
of the garden.                    |la huerta.
                                  |
I think your garden is            |Su huerta de V. me
very well stocked.                |parece muy bien
                                  |surtida.
                                  |
You have plenty of                |Tiene V. de todo en
everything.                       |abundancia.
                                  |
It is better to have              |Mejor es tener demasiado
too much than                     |que no bastante,
too little, for                   |pues lo que
store is no sore.                 |abunda no daña.[25]
                                  |
                                  |
_To write a Letter._              |_Escribir una Carta._
                                  |
I have a letter to                |Tengo que escribir
write to-day.                     |una carta hoy.
                                  |
Is it for the mail?               |¿Es para el correo?
                                  |
Yes, it must leave                |Sí, es preciso que
to-night.                         |vaya esta noche.
                                  |
You have no time to               |V. no tiene tiempo
write, it is very                 |para escribir, es
late already.                     |ya muy tarde.
                                  |
I shall not be long.              |No tardaré mucho.
                                  |
Do you want any                   |¿Necesita V. papel de
note-paper?                       |cartas?
                                  |
I have a whole quire.             |Tengo una mano entera.
                                  |
Lend me a sheet if                |Hágame V. el favor
you please.                       |de prestarme una
                                  |hoja.
                                  |
Be good enough to                 |Tenga V. la bondad
bring me some                     |de traerme sobres,
envelopes, ink,                   |tinta, plumas y
pens and sealing-wax.             |lacre.
                                  |
Here they are. Do                 |Aquí están. ¿Necesita
you require any                   |V. sellos?
stamps?                           |
                                  |
I shall want a shilling's         |Necesitaré por valor de
worth of                          |un chelín en sellos
half-penny                        |de medio penique
stamps to send                    |para poder mandar
some circular letters             |algunas cartas
to my friends                     |circulares a mis
on the continent;                 |amigos del continente;
twelve penny                      |doce de
ones, and four two                |un penique, y
pence half-penny                  |cuatro de dos
ones, as I shall                  |peniques y medio,
have to write to                  |porque tendré que
my brothers in                    |escribir a mis hermanos
Spain.                            |en España.
                                  |
I also want some                  |Necesito también algunas
post-cards and                    |tarjetas
two envelopes for                 |postales y dos
registered letters.               |sobres para cartas
                                  |certificadas.
                                  |
What is the day of                |¿A cuántos estamos
the month?                        |del mes? ¿Qué
                                  |fecha somos?
                                  |
It is the third.                  |Estamos a tres,
                                  |Hoy es día tres.
                                  |
Now, I have only the              |Ahora sólo tengo que
address to write.                 |escribir la dirección.
                                  |
When does the mail                |¿Cuándo sale el correo?
start?                            |
                                  |
The letters must be               |Las cartas se deben
posted before                     |echar en el buzón
half-past five, if                |antes de las cinco
you want them                     |y media, si quiere
to go by the                      |V. que vayan por
evening mail.                     |el correo de la
                                  |tarde.
                                  |
Do you not think                  |¿No le parece a V.
this letter is too                |que esta carta
heavy?                            |es demasiado pesada?
                                  |
I do not think so.                |Me parece que no.
                                  |
Shall I get you the               |¿Quiere V. que le procure
Post Office Order                 |el Giro
you mentioned                     |Postal de que
last night?                       |me habló anoche?
                                  |
Yes, please.                      |Sí, hágame V. el favor.
                                  |
What amount do you                |¿Qué suma quiere V.
want to send?                     |mandar?
                                  |
Two hundred and                   |Doscientas treinta y
thirty-two pesetas                |dos pesetas y
twenty-five centimos.             |veinticinco céntimos.
I am just                         |Salgo ahora
going out and                     |mismo y tomaré
shall get the                     |el dinero en casa
money at my                       |de mi banquero.
banker's.                         |
                                  |
Do you know whether               |¿Sabe V. si se emiten
Post Office Orders                |(se expiden) Giros
are issued                        |Postales después
after five o'clock?               |de las cinco?
                                  |
Take this letter to the           |Lleve V. esta carta al
Post Office, and                  |correo, y franquéela.
pay the postage.                  |
                                  |
Get it registered.                |Hágala certificar.
                                  |
The mail was just going.          |El correo estaba para salir.
                                  |
Will my letter go off             |¿Irá mi carta esta
to-night?                         |noche?
                                  |
Yes, I arrived in time.           |Sí, llegué a tiempo.
                                  |
Your letter will be               |Su carta de V. se
delivered to-morrow               |entregará mañana
morning.                          |por la mañana.
                                  |
When does the mail                |¿Cuándo sale el correo
for England                       |para Inglaterra?
leave?                            |
                                  |
It goes at six o'clock.           |Sale a las seis.
                                  |
How much is the postage           |¿Cuánto es el porte de
for letters to                    |las cartas para
England?                          |Inglaterra?
                                  |
Twenty-five centimos              |Veinticinco céntimos
for every fifteen                 |por cada quince
grammes.                          |gramos.
                                  |
Can you tell me when              |¿Puede V. decirme
these letters will                |cuándo llegarán
arrive at their                   |estas cartas a su
destination ?                     |destino?
                                  |
They ought to arrive              |Deben llegar dentro
within three days,                |de tres días, Señor.
Sir.                              |
                                  |
This letter is too                |Esta carta es demasiado
heavy, the postage                |pesada, el
will be fifty                     |porte será cincuenta
centimos.                         |céntimos.
                                  |
I am expecting a letter           |Espero una carta hoy
from X... today,                  |de X..., hágame
do me the                         |V. el favor de
favour to send to                 |enviar al correo
the Post Office to                |a preguntar si hay
enquire if there                  |cartas para mí.
are any letters for               |
me.                               |
                                  |
Here is my card. Will             |Aquí tiene V. mi tarjeta.
you please tell me                |¿Quiere V.
if there are any                  |decirme si hay
letters for me                    |cartas para mí de
from Paris?                       |París?
                                  |
Must I seal the registered        |¿Debo sellar la carta
letter?                           |certificada?
                                  |
No, Sir, it is not                |No, Señor, no es
necessary.                        |necesario.
                                  |
Take this letter to               |Lleve V. esta carta a
Madam E. and                      |la señora E., y espere
wait for the                      |la respuesta.
answer.                           |
                                  |
These envelopes are               |Estos sobres son inferiores,
inferior, I want                  |los quiero
better ones.                      |mejores.
                                  |
Get me a dozen                    |Cómpreme V. una docena
stamps of twenty-five             |de sellos[26] de
centimos,                         |veinticinco céntimos,
and two foreign                   |y dos tarjetas
post-cards.                       |postales para
                                  |el extranjero.
                                  |
Very good, Sir.                   |Muy bien, Señor.
                                  |
                                  |
_With a Tailor._                  |_Con un Sastre._
                                  |
Somebody is asking for you.       |Preguntan por V.
                                  |
Who is it ? Who                   |¿Quién es? ¿Quién
wants to speak to                 |quiere hablarme?
me.                               |
                                  |
It is the tailor.                 |Es el sastre.
                                  |
Tell him to come up.              |Dígale V. que suba.
                                  |
I have brought your               |Traigo su levita de V.,
coat, Sir.                        |Senor.
                                  |
I am glad you have                |Me alegro que V.
come this morning.                |haya venido esta
                                  |mañana.
                                  |
I began to be impatient.          |Principiaba a impacientarme.
                                  |
I have just finished it.          |La he acabado ahora mismo.
                                  |
I hope you will be                |Espero que le gustará
pleased with it.                  |a V.
                                  |
Let me try it on.                 |Déjeme V. ensayarla
                                  |(probarla).
                                  |
Let me see whether it             |Veamos si me sienta
fits me.                          |bien.
                                  |
It fits you like a                |Le viene a V. como
glove.                            |anillo al dedo.
                                  |
It fits me very well.             |Me viene muy bien.
                                  |
Are not the sleeves               |¿No son las mangas
too long and too                  |demasiado largas
wide?                             |y anchas?
                                  |
They are worn so now.             |Así se llevan ahora.
                                  |
It is too tight.                  |Es demasiado estrecha.
                                  |
It will stretch.                  |Se ensanchará.
                                  |
I think it is too long.           |Me parece demasiado larga.
                                  |
It cuts me under the              |Me aprieta en el
arms.                             |sobaco.
                                  |
I do not see what                 |No veo ningún cambio
alterations there                 |que hacer.
are to make.                      |
                                  |
It could not fit you              |No podría sentarle
better.                           |mejor.
                                  |
Look in the glass.                |Mírese V. en el espejo.
                                  |
What is your charge               |¿Cuánto me pide V.
for this coat?                    |por esta levita?
                                  |
It is rather dear.                |Es un poco cara.
                                  |
Is there no reduction?            |¿No se rebaja nada?
                                  |
This coat is out of               |Esta levita está fuera
fashion.                          |de moda.
                                  |
The waistcoat is not              |El chaleco no está
well made.                        |bien hecho.
                                  |
The waistcoat must                |Será preciso arreglar
be altered.                       |el chaleco.
                                  |
It is too short.                  |Es demasiado corto.
                                  |
It is rather long.                |Es algo largo.
                                  |
I want another coat.              |Necesito otra levita.
                                  |
I want a suit of                  |Quiero un traje.
clothes.                          |
                                  |
Will you take my                  |¿Quiere V. tomarme
measure(ments)?                   |la medida?
                                  |
How will you have it              |¿Cómo quiere V. que
made?                             |se haga?
                                  |
As now worn.                      |Como ahora se estila.
                                  |
In the latest fashion.            |A la última moda.
                                  |
I like to be neatly and           |Me gusta estar aseada
plainly dressed.                  |y sencillamente
                                  |vestido.
                                  |
I want a waistcoat                |Necesito un chaleco y
and a pair of                     |un pantalón.
trousers.                         |
                                  |
Will you show me                  |¿Quiere V. mostrarme
some patterns?                    |unas muestras?
                                  |
Have you brought                  |¿Ha traído V. algunas?
some with you?                    |
                                  |
I have a great variety.           |Tengo un gran surtido.
                                  |
Let me see them.                  |Déjeme V. verlas.
                                  |
I like this fine blue             |Me gusta bastante este
pretty well.                      |azul fino.
                                  |
It is a very fashionable          |Es un color muy a la
colour.                           |moda.
                                  |
Blue will become you              |El azul le vendrá a V.
very well.                        |muy bien.
                                  |
What do you think                 |¿Qué le parece a V.
of this blue?                     |de este azul?
                                  |
This colour will soon             |Este color perderá
fade.                             |pronto.
                                  |
What sort of buttons              |¿Qué clase de botones
will you have ?                   |quiere V.?
                                  |
Will you have covered             |¿Quiere V. botones
buttons ?                         |forrados.
                                  |
Do you wear your                  |¿Lleva V. el pantalón
trousers very                     |muy alto?
high?                             |
                                  |
Not very.                         |No mucho.
                                  |
Neither too high nor              |Ni muy alto ni muy
too low.                          |bajo.
                                  |
Let them come up                  |Hágalo V. subir hasta
about so high.                    |aquí.
                                  |
I like them very low.             |Me gusta muy bajo.
                                  |
It is the fashion to              |Es moda llevarlos muy
wear them very                    |bajos.
low.                              |
                                  |
I do not like them too            |No me gustan demasiado
low.                              |bajos.
                                  |
I must have everything            |Necesito todo para
the day                           |pasado mañana.
after to-morrow.                  |
                                  |
I shall be punctual.              |Seré puntual.
                                  |
When will they be                 |¿Cuando estarán listos?
ready?                            |
                                  |
You will have them                |Los tendrá V. el lunes
next Monday.                      |que viene.
                                  |
At what time must I               |¿A qué hora quiere V.
call, Sir?                        |que venga, Señor?
                                  |
At about ten.                     |A eso de las diez.
                                  |
Between ten and eleven.           |Entre diez y once.
                                  |
                                  |
_With a Dressmaker._              |_Con una Modista._
                                  |
Madam, I have                     |Señora, traigo sus
brought your                      |vestidos de V.
gowns.                            |
                                  |
Ah! Miss A..., is it              |¡Ah! Señorita A...,
you?                              |¿es V.?
                                  |
I was impatient to see you.       |Estaba impaciente de verla.
                                  |
You have made me                  |V. me ha hecho esperar
wait a long while.                |mucho.
                                  |
How many dresses                  |¿Cuántos vestidos me
have you brought?                 |trae V.?
                                  |
Are they of different             |¿Son de hechuras diferentes?
styles?                           |
                                  |
This dress fits me well.          |Este vestido me sienta bien.
                                  |
This one appears very             |Este me parece muy
short.                            |corto.
                                  |
Morning gowns are                 |Las batas se hacen así
now made so.                      |ahora.
                                  |
I do not like them so             |No me gustan tan
short.                            |cortas.
                                  |
Let me try this on.               |Déjeme V. probar ésta.
                                  |
Here is a French cambric          |Aquí tiene V. un
dress to try                      |vestido de batista
on.                               |para probar.
                                  |
Here is a muslin one,             |Aquí tiene V. uno de
and a cambric                     |muselina, y otro
one.                              |de batista.
                                  |
Take that pin out.                |Quite V. ese alfiler.
                                  |
Is all that sewn carefully?       |¿Todo se ha cosido con cuidado?
                                  |
What trimmings will               |¿Qué guarniciones va
you put on this                   |V. a poner en
evening dress?                    |este vestido de
                                  |etiqueta?
                                  |
Is this trimming fashionable?     |¿Es de moda esta guarnición?
                                  |
They are much worn now.           |Se usan mucho actualmente.
                                  |
Trim it with lace.                |Adórnelo con encaje.
                                  |
Is not this gown too              |¿No es este vestido demasiado
full at the bottom?               |ancho abajo?
                                  |
I think it is; I can              |Creo que sí; puedo
easily remedy it.                 |remediarlo fácilmente.
                                  |
The sleeves are too tight.        |Las mangas son demasiado estrechas.
                                  |
The sleeves are too wide.         |Las mangas son demasiado anchas.
                                  |
The waist is too long.            |La cintura es demasiado larga.
                                  |
The waist is too short.           |La cintura es demasiado corta.
                                  |
The gown is not wide enough.      |El vestido no es bastante ancho.
                                  |
The plaits do not fall            |Los pliegues no caen
gracefully.                       |con gracia.
                                  |
The last fits the best.           |El último me sienta mejor.
                                  |
It fits my waist exactly.         |Me sienta perfectamente
                                  |en la
                                  |cintura.
                                  |
Take it for a pattern,            |Tómelo V. por modelo,
and all the others                |y todos los demás
will fit well.                    |me sentarán bien.
                                  |
Remember, I expect                |No olvide V. que
my things in a                    |necesito estos
few days.                         |vestidos dentro de
                                  |pocos días.
                                  |
I will pay you when               |Le pagaré a V.
you bring everything              |cuando me traiga
you have to                       |todo lo que tiene
make for me.                      |que hacerme.
                                  |
Be very punctual,                 |Sírvase V. ser muy
please.                           |puntual.
                                  |
Madam, you shall                  |Señora, tendrá V.
have everything                   |todo mañana por
to-morrow morning.                |la mañana.
                                  |
You will oblige me.               |Me hará V. un favor.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Hairdresser's_              |_En una Peluquería_
_or Barber's._                    |_o Barbería._
                                  |
I want to be shaved               |Quiero que me afeite
as quickly as                     |V. tan pronto
possible.                         |como posible.
                                  |
Very good, Sir; will              |Muy bien, Señor; sírvase
you kindly take                   |V. sentarse
this seat                         |aquí.
                                  |
Ah, you have cut me!              |¡Ah! me ha cortado V.
                                  |
I beg your pardon, it             |Perdone V., no es
is not much, only                 |mucho, es sólamente
a pimple I have                   |un granillo
taken off.                        |que he levantado.
                                  |
Shall I cut your hair             |¿Quiere V. que le
a little?                         |corte un poco el
                                  |pelo (el cabello)?
                                  |
No thanks, it does                |No, gracias, no es
not require cutting               |necesario todavía.
yet.                              |
                                  |
Yes please.                       |Sí, haga V. el favor.
                                  |
Do you want it very short?        |¿Lo quiere V. muy corto?
                                  |
Not too short.                    |No mucho.
                                  |
Take off a little only.           |Iguálelo V. sólamente.
                                  |
Quite short.                      |Al rape.
                                  |
Middling. A trim.                 |A media melena.
                                  |
Give me a shampoo.                |Láveme V. la cabeza.
                                  |Deme V. un
                                  |champú.
                                  |
Part it on the left.              |Hágame V. la raya al
                                  |lado izquierdo.
                                  |
Would you like a little           |¿Quiere V. un poco de
pomade?                           |pomada?
                                  |
No, but you may put               |No, pero puede V.
on a little brilliantine.         |ponerme un poco
                                  |de brillantina.
                                  |
Let me have a looking-glass.      |Deme V. un espejo.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Shoemaker's._               |_En una Zapatería._
                                  |
Have you shoes ready-made?        |¿Tiene V. zapatos hechos ?
                                  |
Show me some of different         |Muéstreme V. algunos
sizes.[27]                        |de varios tamaños.
                                  |
I will try these.                 |Probaré éstos.
                                  |
Give me the shoe-horn.            |Deme V. el calzador.
                                  |
They hurt me.                     |Me lastiman.
                                  |
I cannot walk.                    |No puedo andar.
                                  |
They are too low.                 |Son demasiado bajos.
                                  |
They are too high.                |Son demasiado altos.
                                  |
They are too large.               |Son demasiado grandes.
                                  |
They are too small.               |Son demasiado pequeños.
                                  |
The heels are too wide.           |Los tacones son demasiado anchos.
                                  |
You had better make               |Será mejor que me
me a pair to measure.             |haga V. un par a
                                  |medida.
                                  |
Let me see some boots.            |Muéstreme V. algunas botas.
                                  |
These are too narrow.             |Estas son demasiado estrechas.
                                  |
I think these will fit            |Creo que éstas le
you very well.                    |vendrán muy bien.
                                  |
The boot is narrow,               |La bota es estrecha,
but it will not                   |pero no le hará
hurt you.                         |daño.
                                  |
In fact, they fit me              |En efecto, me vienen
very well.                        |muy bien.
                                  |
Give me the boot-jack             |Deme V. el sacabotas
to pull them off.                 |para quitarlas.
                                  |
Make me also a pair               |Hágame V. también
of slippers.                      |un par de zapatillas.
                                  |
What colour?                      |¿De qué color?
                                  |
Make them very wide.              |Hágalas muy anchas.
                                  |
Do not make the soles             |No haga V. las suelas
too thin.                         |demasiado delgadas.
                                  |
Take care that the                |Cuidado que las viras
welts be well                     |sean bien cosidas.
sewn.                             |
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Woollen-draper's._          |_En una Pañería._
                                  |
I want to buy some                |Quiero comprar paño.
cloth.                            |
                                  |
What sort of cloth do             |¿Qué clase de paño
you want?                         |quiere V.?
                                  |
Show me the best you              |Enséñeme V. lo mejor
have.                             |que tiene.
                                  |
What colour do you                |¿Qué color prefiere
prefer?                           |V.?
                                  |
I like this colour                |Este color me gusta
pretty well.                      |bastante.
                                  |
Is it fashionable?                |¿Es de moda?
                                  |
Blue and black are always         |El azul y el negro
fashionable.                      |están siempre en
                                  |moda.
                                  |
Show me some others.              |Enséñeme V. otros.
                                  |
Here are patterns of              |Aquí tiene V. muestras
all the superfine                 |de todos los paños
cloth I have in                   |finos que tengo en
my shop.                          |la tienda.
                                  |
This colour will soon             |Este color perderá
fade.                             |pronto (durará
                                  |poco).
                                  |
Excuse me, Sir, it                |Perdone V., Señor,
will last very well.              |durará mucho.
                                  |
This cloth is very thin.          |Este paño es muy delgado.
                                  |
Here is another piece.            |Aquí tiene V. otra pieza.
                                  |
It feels very soft.               |Me parece muy suave.
                                  |
It is substantial.                |Es fuerte.
                                  |
This will do.                     |Este me conviene.
                                  |
How much do you ask               |¿Cuanto pide V. por
for it?                           |él?
                                  |
How much a yard is it?            |¿A cómo se vende la vara?
                                  |
Five pesetas.                     |A cinco pesetas.
                                  |
Is that the lowest price?         |¿Es ése el último precio?
                                  |
Cut me three yards.               |Córteme V. tres varas.
                                  |
Here is your money.               |Aquí tiene V. su dinero.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Linen-draper's._            |_En una Lencería._
                                  |
Will you show me                  |Sírvase V. mostrarme
some Irish linen                  |tela de Irlanda de
of the best                       |la mejor calidad.
quality.                          |
                                  |
Here are several pieces.          |Aquí tiene V. varias piezas.
                                  |
Do you prefer it to               |¿La prefiere V. a tela
fine Holland?                     |fina de Holanda?
                                  |
I will show you some.             |Le mostraré a V. alguna.
                                  |
It will cost you more.            |Le costará a V. más.
                                  |
Yes, but it is wider.             |Sí, pero es más ancha.
                                  |
Here is a piece at                |Aquí tiene V. una
one peseta, one                   |pieza a peseta,
at one and a half,                |otra a peseta y
and another at                    |media, y esta otra
two pesetas.                      |a dos pesetas.
                                  |
This is rather fine.              |Esta es un poco delgada.
                                  |
I will unfold this                |Abriré esta pieza.
piece.                            |
                                  |
I think you will find             |Creo que la encontrará
it fine.                          |V. fina.
                                  |
This is a fine white.             |Esta es de un blanco fino.
                                  |
What is the price of it?          |¿Cuál es el precio?
                                  |
That cloth seems to               |Esa tela me parece
me very dear.                     |muy cara.
                                  |
It will wear well.                |Durará mucho.
                                  |
Give me these two pieces.         |Deme V. estas dos piezas.
                                  |
Do you want any                   |¿Necesita V. alguna
French cambric?                   |batista?
                                  |
I have some fine                  |Tengo alguna batista
French cambric                    |fina que no es
which is not dear.                |cara.
                                  |
How many yards do                 |¿Cuántas varas necesita
you want?                         |V.?
                                  |
Allow me to show you              |Permítame V. mostrarle
some fine tablecloths             |algunos
and napkins.                      |manteles finos y
                                  |servilletas.
                                  |
They are of a new pattern.        |Son de un diseño nuevo.
                                  |
They are indeed very              |Son en efecto muy
handsome.                         |hermosos.
                                  |
But I do not want any.            |Pero no necesito ningunos.
                                  |
Have you any good                 |¿Tiene V. pañuelos de
French cambric                    |batista de buena
pocket-handkerchiefs?             |calidad?
                                  |
Yes, Sir, and I am                |Sí, Señor, y estoy
sure they will                    |seguro que le
please you.                       |gustarán a V.
                                  |
I will take four dozen.           |Tomaré cuatro docenas.
                                  |
Have them marked                  |Mándelos V. marcar
with my initials,                 |con mis iniciales,
and send me                       |y envíeme todo
everything to-morrow.             |mañana.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Perfumer's._                |_En una Perfumería._
                                  |
Your shop has been                |Su tienda de V. me ha
recommended to                    |sido recomendada
me by Mrs. B.                     |por la señora B.
                                  |
Have you a good assortment        |¿Tiene V. buen surtido
of perfumery?                     |de perfumes?
                                  |
What articles do you              |¿Qué artículos vende
keep?                             |V.?
                                  |
I have everything you             |Tengo todo lo que
can desire.                       |pueda V. desear.
                                  |
My stock is as complete           |Tengo un surtido tan
as it can be.                     |completo como posible.
                                  |
I want some powder.               |Necesito polvos.
                                  |
Will you have it scented?         |¿Los quiere V. perfumados?
                                  |
Yes; show me some jessamine.      |Sí; enséñeme V. los de jazmín.
                                  |
The scent is not very strong.     |El olor no es muy fuerte.
                                  |
It will suit me.                  |Me conviene.
                                  |
I have also violet,               |Los tengo también
rose, and orange-flower.          |de violeta, de
                                  |rosa, y de azahar.
                                  |
I want also some lavender-water   |Quiero también aguas
and some eau de                   |de lavanda y de
Cologne.                          |Colonia.
                                  |
Have you any essential oils?      |¿Tiene V. aceites esenciales?
                                  |
Yes, Madam, several sorts.        |Sí, Señora, de varias calidades.
                                  |
This is of a superior quality.    |Este es de una calidad superior.
                                  |
How much do you sell              |¿A cómo vende V.
this oil of roses                 |este aceite de
for?                              |rosas?
                                  |
That is very dear.                |Es muy caro.
                                  |
It is too dear.                   |Es demasiado caro.
                                  |
It is excessively dear.           |Es carísimo.
                                  |
I can buy some elsewhere          |Puedo comprarlo más
for less.                         |barato en otra parte.
                                  |
It is the usual price.            |Es el precio de costumbre.
                                  |
It is a fixed price.              |Es precio fijo.
                                  |
Let me have a bottle              |Necesito una botella
of orange-flower                  |de agua de azahar.
water.                            |
                                  |
I have now all I want.            |Tengo ahora todo lo que necesito.
                                  |
Give me my account.               |Deme V. mi cuenta.
                                  |
It amounts to...                  |Sube a...
                                  |
Here is your money                |Aquí tiene V. su
and my address.                   |dinero y mi dirección.
                                  |
Send me all these                 |Envíeme V. todos estos
articles.                         |artículos.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Bookseller's._              |_En una Librería._
                                  |
Have you any new books?           |¿Tiene V. obras nuevas?
                                  |
I should like to see              |Quisiera ver los libros
the books you                     |que V. acaba de
have just received.               |recibir.
                                  |
With great pleasure,              |Con mucho gusto, Señor;
Sir; they were unpacked           |acaban de
just now.                         |desempaquetarlos.
                                  |
They are books of history,        |Son libros de historia,
mathematics,                      |matemáticas, filosofía,
philosophy,                       |teología,
divinity, physics                 |física y derecho.
and law.                          |
                                  |
Are all these new books?          |¿Son todas obras nuevas?
                                  |
No, Sir, some are                 |No, Señor, hay nuevas
new, some are old                 |y viejas.
publications.                     |
                                  |
I hope you will find              |Espero que encontrará
some to suit your                 |V. algunas de su
taste.                            |gusto.
                                  |
Here is a list of the             |Aquí tiene V. la lista
books I wish to                   |de los libros que
have.                             |deseo tener.
                                  |
Have you now the                  |¿Tiene V. ahora el
Mariana that I                    |Mariana que le
asked you for?                    |pedí?
                                  |
I have only the 18mo.             |Sólo tengo la edición
edition.                          |en dieciochavo.
                                  |
It is embellished with            |Está adornada con
coloured plates.                  |láminas de color.
                                  |
Show me some volumes              |Enséñeme V. algunas
of Quevedo.                       |de las obras de
                                  |Quevedo.
                                  |
They will bring you               |Le traerán algunas en
some immediately.                 |seguida.
                                  |
Here are some.                    |Aquí tiene V. algunas.
                                  |
This size suits me                |Este tamaño me gusta
pretty well.                      |bastante.
                                  |
I should like to have             |Las quiero encuadernadas.
them bound.                       |
                                  |
I will have them                  |Deseo que sean encuadernadas
bound in calf,                    |en becerrillo, y rotuladas.
and lettered.                     |
                                  |
I wish to have the                |Deseo que el canto sea
edges marbled.                    |jaspeado.
                                  |
Show me some of                   |Enséñeme V. algunos
your most handsome                |de sus libros más
books                             |hermosos encuadernados
bound in Russian                  |en cuero
leather.                          |de Rusia.
                                  |
Here are the best we              |Estos son los mejores
have at present.                  |que tenemos al
                                  |momento.
                                  |
I like this pattern               |Este diseño me gusta
exceedingly.                      |muchísimo.
                                  |
I wish this Virgil to             |Quiero que este Virgilio
be bound in morocco.              |sea encuadernado
                                  |en tafilete.
                                  |
Is the price the same             |¿Es igual el precio
for all colours?                  |para todos los
                                  |colores?
                                  |
Exactly the same.                 |Precisamente igual.
                                  |
Then I will have it               |Entonces quiero que
bound in green.                   |sea encuadernado
                                  |en verde.
                                  |
What is the cost for              |¿Cuál es el coste para
each volume?                      |(¿Cuánto cuesta)
                                  |cada volumen?
                                  |
Have you Moratin's                |¿Tiene V. las obras
works complete?                   |completas de Moratín?
                                  |
We have the best                  |Tenemos la mejor edición.
edition.                          |
                                  |
I wish to have the                |Quiero el Viaje del
Travels of young                  |joven Anacarsis.
Anacharsis.                       |
                                  |
I have one in octavo,             |Tengo un ejemplar en
but it is only in                 |octavo, pero encartonado.
boards.                           |
                                  |
I will take it, but you           |Lo tomaré, pero tendrá
must have it                      |V. que mandarlo
bound in Russia                   |encuadernar en
leather.                          |cuero de Rusia.
                                  |
Here is a fine edition            |Aquí tiene V. una hermosa
of Cervantes.                     |edición de
                                  |Cervantes.
                                  |
I see in your catalogue           |Veo en su catálogo de
a great                           |V. un gran número
many splendid                     |de ediciones
editions at a very                |magníficas a precios
high price.                       |muy elevados
                                  |(altos, subidos).
                                  |
Have you a Guevara                |¿Tiene V. un Guevara
in small size?                    |de tamaño pequeño?
                                  |
I have the stereotype             |Tengo la edición
edition, on four                  |estereotípica, en
different kinds of                |cuatro clases diferentes
paper.                            |de papel.
                                  |
This edition on large             |Esta edición en papel
vellum paper is                   |vitela grande está
beautifully bound.                |hermosamente encuadernada.
                                  |
I think I had better              |Creo que haré bien en
take the large                    |tomar el ejemplar
vellum paper.                     |en papel vitela
                                  |grande.
                                  |
Here is a very pretty             |Aquí tiene V. un
copy.                             |ejemplar muy bonito.
                                  |
It is bound in green              |Está encuadernado en
morocco, with                     |tafilete verde, con
gilt edges.                       |canto dorado.
                                  |
I have romances and               |Tengo romances y novelas,
novels, plays, reviews,           |obras teatrales,
etc.                              |revistas,
                                  |etc.
                                  |
Oh! I will not have  any.         |¡Oh! de ésos no quiero.
                                  |
Sir, do you want anything         |Señor, ¿necesita V.
else?                             |algo más?
                                  |
I want a copy of                  |Quiero un ejemplar de
Solis; but I do                   |Solís; pero no veo
not see one.                      |ninguno.
                                  |
I have several, but               |Tengo varies, pero
they are in sheets.               |están en hojas.
                                  |
What sort of binding              |¿Qué clase de encuadernación
do you prefer?                    |prefiere V.?
                                  |
Will you have it in               |¿Lo quiere V. en
calf or sheepskin?                |becerrillo o en
                                  |badana?
                                  |
Half-binding will do;             |Bastará la media pasta;
but it must be                    |pero quiero que
lettered like that                |sea rotulado como
Mariana.                          |ese Mariana.
                                  |
I will take care that             |Tendré cuidado de
it is done as you                 |mandarlo hacer
wish.                             |como V. desea.
                                  |
I also want Hossfeld's            |Necesito también la
English-Spanish                   |Gramática Inglesa-Española
Grammar, as well                  |de Hossfeld, así como
as Hossfeld's                     |la Gramática
Spanish-English                   |Española-Inglesa.
Grammar.                          |
                                  |
I also require Hossfeld's         |Quiero también el Libro
Spanish                           |de Lectura Española
Reader.                           |de Hossfeld.
                                  |
Do you want anything else?        |¿Necesita V. alguna cosa más?
                                  |
Have you a map of Madrid?         |¿Tiene V. un plano de Madrid?
                                  |
I wish to have the                |Quiero tener el mejor
best and the most                 |y el más exacto
correct that is                   |que se haya publicado.
published.                        |
                                  |
Send me everything to-day.        |Envíeme V. todo hoy.
                                  |
I intend to leave                 |Pienso salir de Madrid
Madrid to-morrow                  |mañana por la
morning.                          |mañana.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Jeweller's._                |_En una Joyería._
                                  |
Will you show me                  |¿Quiere V. mostrarme
some rings?                       |algunas sortijas?
                                  |
Are these set with                |¿Están éstas engastadas
fine stones?                      |con piedras
                                  |finas (piedras
                                  |preciosas)?
                                  |
What is the price of              |¿Cuál es el precio de
this ring.                        |esta sortija?
                                  |
It is much too dear.              |Es demasiado cara.
                                  |
That diamond has a                |Ese diamante tiene
beautiful lustre.                 |mucho brillo.
                                  |
I like that ring very             |Esa sortija me gusta
much.                             |mucho.
                                  |
I think it is rather too          |Creo que es demasiado
large for me.                     |grande para mí.
                                  |
Show me some others.              |Enséñeme V. otras.
                                  |
This fits me well.                |Esta me viene bien.
                                  |
Is it firmly mounted?             |¿Es fuerte el engaste?
                                  |
What do you ask for it?           |¿Cuánto pide V. por ella?
                                  |
I prefer the first.               |Prefiero la primera.
                                  |
Can you make it smaller?          |¿Puede V. achicarla?
                                  |
Very easily, and without          |Muy fácilmente, y sin
injuring the                      |dañar el engaste.
mounting.                         |
                                  |
I want a gold chain.              |Quiero una cadena de oro.
                                  |
Mine is no longer in              |La mía ya no es de
fashion.                          |moda (ya no está en moda).
                                  |
I can take it in exchange.        |Puedo tomarla en cambio.
                                  |
What will you allow               |¿Cuánto me dará V.
me for mine?                      |por la mía?
                                  |
I will weigh it.                  |La pesaré.
                                  |
If I exchange my                  |Si cambio mi cadena,
chain, I must exchange            |tendré que cambiar
my seal                           |mi sello también.
too.                              |
                                  |
Here are several seals            |Aquí tiene V. varios
of the newest                     |sellos de la última
fashion.                          |moda.
                                  |
I will take these two.            |Tomaré estos dos.
                                  |
I should like to have             |Quiero que se graben
my initials engraved              |mis iniciales en
on this seal.                     |este sello.
                                  |
Will you get it engraved?         |¿Quiere V. mandarlo grabar?
                                  |
I will give it to the             |Lo daré al grabador
most skilful engraver             |más hábil que
we have.                          |tenemos.
                                  |
Show me some earrings.            |Enséñeme V. algunos pendientes.
                                  |
Here are some of exquisite        |Aquí tiene V. algunos
workmanship.                      |de una hechura exquisita.
                                  |
Here is a splendid                |Hay aquí un collar
necklace.                         |magnífico.
                                  |
It is not for sale.               |No es para vender.
                                  |
I have just sold it to            |Acabo de venderlo a
a lady.                           |una señora.
                                  |
These bracelets are               |Estas pulseras son
for the same lady.                |para la misma
                                  |señora.
                                  |
What is the price of              |¿Cuál es el precio de
this pin?                         |este alfiler?
                                  |
Are these pins of the             |¿Son estos alfileres de
latest fashion?                   |la última moda?
                                  |
This topaz surrounded             |Me gusta mucho más
with pearls I                     |este topacio cercado
like much better.                 |de perlas.
                                  |
It is very beautiful.             |Es muy hermoso.
                                  |
I think it is stronger.           |Me parece más fuerte.
                                  |
I have something else             |Tengo otra cosa que
to show you.                      |enseñarle a V.
                                  |
No, thank you; I                  |No, gracias; volveré
will come another day.            |otro día.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Watchmaker's._              |_En una Relojería._
                                  |
I am not pleased with             |No me gusta el reloj
the watch you                     |que V. me vendió.
sold me.                          |
                                  |
Yet I took it on your             |Sin embargo, lo tomé
word.                             |bajo su palabra.
                                  |
It does not go well.              |No va bien.
                                  |
It gains.                         |Adelanta.
                                  |
It loses.                         |Atrasa.
                                  |
I cannot regulate it.             |No puedo arreglarlo.
                                  |
It is a new watch.                |Es un reloj nuevo.
                                  |
It will require some              |Hará falta algún tiempo
time to regulate it.              |para arreglarlo.
                                  |
I think so.                       |Así creo.
                                  |
If you are not satisfied,         |Si V. no está satisfecho,
I will change                     |lo cambiaré.
it.                               |
                                  |
Here is a very good               |Aquí tiene V. un reloj
watch.                            |muy bueno.
                                  |
It also shows the day             |Indica también el día
of the month.                     |del mes.
                                  |
I do not like                     |No me gustan relojes
such complicated                  |tan complicados.
watches.                          |
                                  |
They are often out of             |Se descomponen a menudo.
order.                            |
                                  |
I want a good repeater.           |Necesito un buen reloj
                                  |de repetición.
                                  |
I have an excellent one.          |Tengo uno excelente.
                                  |
Do you warrant it?                |¿Lo garantiza V.?
                                  |
Will you let me have              |¿Me lo da V. a
it on trial?                      |prueba?
                                  |
I will only take it on            |Lo tomo sólamente
those terms.                      |bajo esa condición.
                                  |
I agree to it with                |Convengo en ello con
pleasure.                         |gusto.
                                  |
I will let you have it            |Se lo doy a prueba.
on trial.                         |
                                  |
Since I had it, it has            |Después que lo tengo,
not varied one                    |no ha variado ni
minute.                           |un minuto.
                                  |
You will be pleased               |V. estará contento con
with it.                          |él.
                                  |
I can warrant it.                 |Puedo garantizarlo.
                                  |
How much do you                   |¿Cuánto pide V. por
want for it?                      |él?
                                  |
I have a watch at                 |Tengo un reloj en casa
home which                        |que necesita limpiarse.
wants cleaning.                   |
                                  |
It is an old watch.               |Es un reloj viejo.
                                  |
It has not gone for               |Hace una quincena
a fortnight.                      |que no anda.
                                  |
I let it fall.                    |Lo dejé caer.
                                  |
I think the mainspring            |Creo que se ha roto
is broken.                        |el muelle real.
                                  |
I will send it to you             |Se lo enviaré a V. hoy.
to-day.                           |
                                  |
I must keep it a few              |Tendré que guardarlo
days.                             |algunos días.
                                  |
When will you return it?          |¿Cuándo me lo devolverá V.?
                                  |
I cannot promise it               |No puedo prometérselo
you before a fortnight.           |para antes de una
                                  |quincena.
                                  |
It is a long time.                |Es mucho tiempo.
                                  |
If there is nothing               |Si no se ha roto nada,
broken you shall                  |lo tendrá V. mañana.
have it to-morrow.                |
                                  |
Do not disappoint me.             |No falte V.
                                  |
You may rely on its               |Puede V. contar con
being ready at                    |que estará listo
that time.                        |para entonces.
                                  |
Here are very beautiful           |Aquí tiene V. relojes
clocks.                           |muy hermosos.
                                  |
I want one.                       |Necesito uno.
                                  |
You can select which              |Puede V. escoger el
you like.                         |que quiera.
                                  |
Not to-day.                       |Hoy no.
                                  |
We will speak of it               |Hablaremos de ello en
another time.                     |otra ocasión.
                                  |
Do you sell spectacles?           |¿Vende V. anteojos?
                                  |
I want an opera-glass.            |Necesito gemelos de teatro.
                                  |
Do you keep microscopes?          |¿Tiene V. microscopios?
                                  |
This glass magnifies              |Este vidrio aumenta
too much.                         |demasiado.
                                  |
That does not magnify             |Ese no aumenta bastante.
enough.                           |
                                  |
That opera-glass is               |Esos gemelos no son
not good.                         |buenos.
                                  |
I want a better one.              |Los quiero mejores.
                                  |
                                  |
_At a Picture Gallery._           |_En una Galería de_
                                  |_Pinturas._
                                  |
Is there any collection           |¿Hay alguna colección
of paintings in                   |de pinturas en
this town?                        |esta ciudad?
                                  |
Is there an annual                |¿Hay exposición anual
exhibition of                     |de pinturas en
paintings in this                 |este lugar?
place?                            |
                                  |
Yes, Sir; I hope you              |Si, Señor; espero que
will be pleased                   |le gustará a V.
with it.                          |
                                  |
When will the exhibition          |¿Cuándo tendrá lugar
take place?                       |la exposición?
                                  |
It is open now.                   |Está abierta ahora.
                                  |
Let us go there.                  |Vamos allá.
                                  |
I have a passion for              |Soy apasionado por
pictures.                         |(muy aficionado a)
                                  |las pinturas.
                                  |
That painting is a                |Esa pintura es una
copy from Raphael.                |copia de Rafael.
                                  |
This is from Poussin.             |Esta es de Poussin.
                                  |
This is a copy from               |Esta es una copia de
Titian.                           |Ticiano.
                                  |
Titian excelled in                |Ticiano sobresalió en
colouring.                        |el colorido.
                                  |
And in drawing likewise.          |Y también en el dibujo.
                                  |
There is a fine blending          |Hay una excelente
of colours in                     |distribución de
that picture.                     |colores en esa
                                  |pintura.
                                  |
Its composition is fine.          |Su composición es excelente.
                                  |
This is an historical             |Este es un cuadro
picture.                          |histórico.
                                  |
This is a well executed           |Esta es una pintura
painting.                         |bien ejecutada.
                                  |
The passions are well             |Las pasiones están
portrayed.                        |bien representadas.
                                  |
How do you like the               |¿Qué le parece a V.
foreground?                       |del primer plano?
                                  |
That picture requires             |Ese cuadro es preciso
to be seen in its                 |verlo en buena
proper light.                     |luz.
                                  |
It is not in a good               |Este no es su punto
light (situation).                |de vista. No le
                                  |da bien la luz. No
                                  |está bien colocado.
                                  |
That picture is deficient         |A esa pintura le falta
in colouring.                     |color.
                                  |
That painter draws                |Ese pintor dibuja mejor
better than he                    |que colora.
colours.                          |
                                  |
Those colours are too             |Esos colores son demasiado
gaudy.                            |vivos.
                                  |
They should have                  |Debían haber sido suavizados.
been subdued.                     |
                                  |
There are fine tones              |Hay hermosos matices
of colour in that                 |en esa pintura.
picture.                          |
                                  |
This valuable picture             |Este cuadro precioso
is in fine preservation.          |está bien conservado.
                                  |
How well the lights               |¡Qué bien distribuídos
and shades are                    |están los claros y
distributed!                      |oscuros!
                                  |
That painter thoroughly           |Ese pintor entiende
understands                       |perfectamente la
the disposition                   |distribución de los
of the                            |claros (de las
lights.                           |luces).
                                  |
It is in the style of             |Es del estilo de Rembrandt.
Rembrandt.                        |
                                  |
That great master                 |Ese gran maestro
formed a style                    |formó un estilo
adapted to great                  |adaptado a los
effects.                          |grandes efectos.
                                  |
A landscape forms the             |Un paisaje forma el
background to                     |fondo de las figuras
the figures in that               |en ese cuadro.
picture.                          |
                                  |
This is a watercolour.            |Esta es una acuarela (una aguada).
                                  |
That drawing is from              |Ese dibujo es del natural.
nature.                           |
                                  |
That artist understands           |Ese artista entiende
very well                         |muy bien el efecto
the effect of light               |del claroscuro.
and shade.                        |
                                  |
These figures are                 |Estas figuras están
painted in half                   |pintadas a media
tone.                             |tinta.
                                  |
                                  |
That painter succeeds             |Ese pintor tiene más
better in portrait                |éxito con los retratos
than in historical                |que con los
painting.                         |cuadros históricos.
                                  |
Have you seen that                |¿Ha visto V. aquel
pencil-sketch?                    |bosquejo al lápiz?
                                  |
No, I was examining               |No, estaba examinando
this drawing                      |este dibujo
in Indian ink.                    |de tinta china.
                                  |
I like oil-painting               |Me gusta más la pintura
better.                           |al oleo.
                                  |
There are two very                |Cerca de la ventana
beautiful sea-pieces              |hay dos marinas
near the                          |muy hermosas.
window.                           |
                                  |
The reflections in the            |Los reflejos en el agua
water are admirable.              |son admirables.
                                  |
See those clouds, how             |Vea V. esas nubes,
skilfully the lights              |¡qué bien se han
are managed?                      |manejado las luces!
                                  |
I am delighted with               |Estoy muy contento
all I have seen.                  |con todo lo que he
                                  |visto.
                                  |
I think we have seen              |Creo que hemos visto
everything.                       |todo.
                                  |
Let us go.                        |Vámonos.
                                  |
We will come again                |Volveremos mañana.
to-morrow.                        |
                                  |
                                  |
_Chess._                          |_Ajedrez._
                                  |
Let us play a game                |Juguemos una partida
at chess.                         |de ajedrez.
                                  |
I like it better than             |Me gusta más que el
whist, or even                    |whist, o el piquete.
piquet.                           |
                                  |
I do not know the                 |No conozco bien el
game well.                        |juego.
                                  |
Where is the chess-board.         |¿Dónde está el tablero?
                                  |
Here it is, with the              |Aquí está, con las
chess men.                        |piezas.
                                  |
I want a bishop.                  |Me falta un alfil.
                                  |
Your queen is not in              |Su reina de V. no está
its proper place.                 |en su casilla.
                                  |
Who begins?                       |¿Quién sale?
                                  |
Let us draw lots.                 |Echemos suertes.
                                  |
I have the first move.            |Yo soy mano.
                                  |
It is a great advantage.          |Es una gran ventaja.
                                  |
I will move this man.             |Adelantaré esta pieza.
                                  |
Your pieces are well              |Sus piezas de V. están
supported.                        |bien apoyadas.
                                  |
I am afraid I must                |Temo que tendré que
exchange pieces.                  |cambiar de piezas.
                                  |
I have lost a knight.             |He perdido un caballo.
                                  |
I must castle.                    |Tengo que enrocar.
                                  |
You cannot castle                 |V. no puede enrocar
after having                      |después de haber
moved your king.                  |movido el rey.
                                  |
Check to the king.                |Jaque al rey.
                                  |
I will cover this check           |Cubriré este jaque con
with my castle.                   |la torre.
                                  |
I take it.                        |La tomo.
                                  |
I cannot win.                     |No puedo ganar.
                                  |
It is a drawn game.               |Son tablas.
                                  |
I was in hopes you                |Esperaba que V. me
would have given                  |diese mate (jaquemate).
me checkmate.                     |
                                  |
I cannot play with you.           |No puedo jugar con V.
                                  |
What odds will you                |¿Qué ventaja me da
give me?                          |V.?
                                  |
If you will give me a             |Si V. quiere darme
castle, I will try                |una torre, probaré
another game.                     |otra partida.
                                  |
It is more than I                 |Es más de lo que debo
ought to give, but                |darle, pero lo haré
I will do it with                 |con gusto.
pleasure.                         |
                                  |
                                  |
_On the Spanish_                  |_Sobre la Lengua_
_Language._                       |_Española._
                                  |
Do you speak Spanish?             |¿Habla V. español?
                                  |
I speak it a little.              |Lo hablo un poco.
                                  |
I speak it just enough            |Lo hablo bastante
to make myself                    |para hacerme entender.
understood.                       |
                                  |
He speaks Spanish                 |Habla español bastante
fairly well.                      |bien.
                                  |
Speak Spanish to me.              |Hábleme V. en español.
                                  |
You pronounce it well.            |V. lo pronuncia bien.
                                  |
What book are you                 |¿Qué libro traduce
translating?                      |V.?
                                  |
I have translated P.'s            |He traducido las
Fables.                           |Fábulas de P.
                                  |
Now I am translating              |Ahora estoy traduciendo
the extracts in                   |los extractos
Hossfeld's Spanish                |en el libro de
Composition                       |Composición y
and Idioms.                       |Modismos Españoles
                                  |de Hossfeld.
                                  |
I afterwards compare              |Después comparo mi
my work with the                  |trabajo con la
translation in the                |traducción dada
key.                              |en la clave.
                                  |
In order to know a                |Para saber a fondo
language thoroughly,              |una lengua, la
grammar                           |gramática es absolutamente
is absolutely necessary.          |necesaria.
                                  |
In order to speak a               |Para hablar bien una
language well,                    |lengua, es preciso
you must learn                    |aprender la
phraseology.                      |fraseología.
                                  |
One may be able to                |Se puede leer y escribir
read and write a                  |una lengua
language and yet                  |sin poder hablarla.
be unable to                      |
speak it.                         |
                                  |
In Spanish the written            |En español la lengua
language does                     |escrita no difiere
not differ much                   |mucho de la lengua
from the spoken                   |hablada.
language.                         |
                                  |
What grammar do you use?          |¿Qué gramática usa V.?
                                  |
I am using Hossfeld's             |Estoy estudiando la
Grammar, and I                    |Gramática de
find it invaluable,               |Hossfeld y la
especially for                    |encuentro excelente,
commercial purposes.              |especialmente
                                  |para fines
                                  |comerciales.
                                  |
How long have you                 |¿Cuánto tiempo hace
been learning                     |que aprende V.
Spanish?                          |el español?
                                  |
About ten months.                 |Unos diez meses.
                                  |
You have made a                   |V. ha hecho mucho
great deal of progress.           |progreso.
                                  |
I would advise you                |Le aconsejo a V. que
to continue to                    |continúe aplicándose.
apply yourself to                 |
it.                               |
                                  |
Spanish is a very important       |El español es una
language;                         |lengua muy importante;
it is spoken not                  |se habla
only in Spain,                    |no sólo en España,
but also in parts                 |sino también
of Africa, in                     |en partes de Africa,
Mexico, Central                   |en Méjico,
and South America,                |Centro y Sud
the West                          |América, las Indias
Indies, and in the                |Occidentales, y
Philippine Islands.               |en las Islas Filipinas.
                                  |
English and Spanish               |El inglés y el español
are two of the                    |son dos de las
most useful languages             |lenguas más útiles
that one                          |que se pueden
can learn.                        |aprender.
                                  |
English is a language             |El inglés es una lengua
of great commercial               |de gran valor
value.                            |comercial.
                                  |
I learnt Spanish at               |Aprendí el español en
school; I took                    |la escuela; tomé
many lessons in                   |muchas lecciones
classes and privately;            |en clase y privadamente;
I know                            |sé bastante
my grammar                        |bien la gramática,
pretty well, and                  |y comprendo
understand nearly                 |casi todo
everything I read,                |lo que leo, pero no
but cannot say                    |puedo decir dos
two words in an                   |palabras de una
intelligible manner.              |manera inteligible.
What ought                        |¿Qué debo
I to do?                          |hacer?
                                  |
Hear Spanish spoken;              |Oír hablar español;
have a master                     |tener un profesor
who speaks to                     |que le hable en
you in Spanish--very              |español--muy lentamente
slowly at                         |al principio,
first, and then                   |y después
more quickly,--on                 |más de prisa,--sobre
subjects which                    |asuntos que
are familiar to                   |le sean a V. familiares.
you.                              |
                                  |
Is it then more useful            |¿Es, pues, más útil oír
to listen, and                    |y tratar de comprender
to try to understand              |lo que se
what is                           |dice en una lengua,
said in a language,               |que tratar de
than to try to                    |hablarla por sí
speak it one's                    |mismo?
self?                             |
                                  |
Both are useful and               |Las dos cosas son útiles
necessary.                        |y necesarias.
                                  |
Read aloud as much                |Lea V. en alta voz
as you can.                       |cuanto pueda.
                                  |
                                  |
_Hiring Apartments._              |_Alquilar Cuartos._
                                  |
Can you tell me if                |¿Puede V. decirme si
there are any                     |hay cuartos desalquilados
apartments to be                  |en esta
had in this street?               |calle?
                                  |
Yes, Sir, there are               |Si, Señor, hay varios,
several, in this                  |en esta calle y en
street and in the                 |las contiguas.
adjoining ones.                   |
                                  |
I have seen from                  |He visto por su anuncio
your advertisement                |en el periódico
in the newspaper                  |que tiene V.
that you                          |cuartos que alquilar.
have some rooms                   |¿Puedo
to let. Can I see                 |verlos ?
them?                             |
                                  |
Certainly, Sir.                   |Seguramente, Señor.
                                  |
On which floor are they?          |¿En qué piso están?
                                  |
I have a sitting-room             |Tengo en el primer
and a bedroom                     |piso una sala y un
on the first floor,               |dormitorio (una
and a bedroom on                  |alcoba), y en
the second.                       |el segundo un
                                  |dormitorio.
                                  |
These two rooms will              |Estos dos cuartos espero
suit you, I hope.                 |que le convendrán
                                  |a V.
                                  |
They are well furnished           |Están bien amueblados
and decorated.                    |y decorados.
                                  |
How much do you                   |¿Cuánto pide V. por
want for these                    |estos cuartos?
rooms?                            |
                                  |
Fifteen pesetas a                 |Quince pesetas por
week, including                   |semana, incluso el
attendance.                       |servicio.
                                  |
Could I have my                   |¿Podría comer aquí?
meals here? I                     |Necesitaría tomar
should want breakfast,            |el almuerzo y a
and sometimes                     |veces la comida
dinner too.                       |también.
                                  |
Yes, Sir, I shall be              |Si, Señor, tendré mucho
happy to supply                   |gusto en servirle
the meals you                     |las comidas
require, and have                 |que necesite, y no
no doubt you will                 |dudo que estará
be satisfied with                 |V. contento con
our table.                        |nuestra mesa.
                                  |
How much do you                   |¿Cuánto pide V. por
charge for breakfast              |el almuerzo y la
and dinner?                       |comida?
                                  |
Two pesetas for                   |Dos pesetas por el almuerzo,
breakfast,  and                   |y tres
three for dinner.                 |por la comida.
                                  |
Shall I have to pay               |¿Tendré algo que pagar
any extras?                       |aparte?
                                  |
No, Sir, none except              |No, Señor, nada excepto
the gas, which is                 |el gas, que
half a peseta a                   |cuesta medía peseta
week.                             |por semana.
                                  |
I suppose you require             |Supongo que necesita
some references.                  |V. referencias.
                                  |
Yes, Sir, it is usual             |Si, Señor, es nuestra
with us to require                |costumbre pedir y
and to give references.           |dar referencias.
                                  |
Very good, Madam;                 |Muy bien, Señora;
here are my references;           |aquí tiene V. mis
can I                             |referencias; ¿podré
come in to-morrow?                |entrar mañana?
                                  |
Certainly, Sir; I shall           |Ciertamente, Señor;
have everything                   |tendré todo preparado
ready for you.                    |para V.
                                  |
Very well, here is my             |Muy bien, aquí tiene
rent for the first                |V. el alquiler para
month. My name                    |el primer mes. Me
is...                             |llamo...
                                  |
I thank you very                  |Muchas gracias; hasta
much, Sir; I shall                |mañana.
see you to-morrow.                |
                                  |
                                  |
_Engaging a Man-servant._         |_Ajustar un Criado._
                                  |
Sir, I have heard you             |Señor, se me ha dicho
want a servant.                   |que necesita V. un
                                  |criado.
                                  |
Yes, who sent you to me?          |Sí, ¿quién le mandó a V. aquí?
                                  |
By whom are you recommended?      |¿Por quién viene V. recomendado?
                                  |
By Mr. B., with whom              |Por el señor B., con
I have travelled.                 |quien he viajado.
                                  |
I know him very well.             |Le conozco muy bien.
                                  |
On his recommendation             |Con su recomendación,
I shall not                       |no tengo inconveniente
hesitate to engage                |en tomarle
you.                              |a V. a mi
                                  |servicio.
                                  |
I suppose you possess             |Supongo que V. tiene
the qualifications                |las calidades necesarias.
I want.                           |
                                  |
I shall stay in this              |Me quedaré en esta
town a fortnight                  |ciudad quince días
longer.                           |más.
                                  |
Where have you travelled?         |¿Dónde ha viajado V.?
                                  |
I have travelled in               |He viajado en Alemania
Germany and Italy.                |e Italia.
                                  |
Will you accompany                |¿Quiere V. acompañarme
me to Switzerland?                |a Suiza?
                                  |
Have you performed                |¿Ha hecho V. ese viaje
that journey before?              |antes?
                                  |
Sir, I am a Swiss.                |Señor, soy Suizo.
                                  |
How old are you?                  |¿Cuántos años tiene V.?
                                  |
Are you a married man?            |¿Es V. casado?
                                  |
Have you been long                |¿Ha estado V. mucho
in Germany?                       |tiempo en Alemania?
                                  |
Have you travelled                |¿Ha viajado V. mucho
much in France?                   |en Francia?
                                  |
Can you ride a horse?             |¿Sabe V. montar a caballo?
                                  |
Can you write?                    |¿Sabe V. escribir?
                                  |
Yes, Sir.                         |Sí, Señor.
                                  |
What languages do                 |¿Qué lenguas sabe
you know?                         |(posee) V.?
                                  |
I understand German               |Entiendo el alemán y
and Italian.                      |el italiano.
                                  |
I likewise know the               |Conozco también las
coins,  weights                   |monedas, pesos y
and measures of                   |medidas de los
the countries in                  |países en que he
which I have travelled.           |viajado.
                                  |
You may be very                   |V. puede serme muy
useful to me.                     |útil.
                                  |
What wages do you ask?            |¿Qué salario pide V.?
                                  |
I have always had                 |He tenido siempre
£20 a year and                    |veinte libras al
my board.                         |año y la comida.
                                  |
I will give you the same.         |Le daré lo mismo.
                                  |
I will give you £3 a              |Le daré tres libras al
month, without                    |mes, sin comida.
board.                            |
                                  |
When we travel, I                 |Cuando viejemos, yo
will pay your expenses.           |pagaré sus gastos.
                                  |
You must give me                  |Me dará V. todas las
every evening an                  |noches cuenta exacta
exact account of                  |de todo lo
everything you                    |que haya gastado
have laid out for                 |por cuenta mía.
me.                               |
                                  |
I will pay you immediately.       |Le pagaré a V. en
                                  |seguida.
                                  |
I will call on your               |Voy a ver a su último
former master.                    |amo.
                                  |
                                  |
_Engaging a Maid-servant._        |_Ajustar una Criada._
                                  |
Have you been long                |¿Hace mucho que
in service?                       |sirve V.?
                                  |
What was the last                 |¿Cuál ha sido su
place you were at?                |último empleo?
                                  |
Do you understand                 |¿Entiende V. de cocina?
cooking?                          |
                                  |
Are you acquainted                |¿Entiende V. del manejo
with the management               |de una casa?
of a house?                       |
                                  |
How old are you?                  |¿Cuantos años tiene V.?
                                  |
You seem very young.              |Parece V. muy joven.
                                  |
I am twenty-two.                  |Tengo veintidós.
                                  |
Do you understand                 |¿Entiende V. de costura?
needlework?                       |
                                  |
Are you a good                    |¿Es V. buena costurera?
needlewoman?                      |
                                  |
Can you wash fine linen?          |¿Sabe V. lavar ropa fina?
                                  |
Could you occasionally            |¿Podría V. reemplazar
replace my                        |de cuando en
housemaid?                        |cuando a mi criada
                                  |de mano?
                                  |
Have you been in                  |¿Ha servido V. en
many families?                    |muchas casas?
                                  |
Whose house have                  |¿Cuál es la casa que
you just left?                    |V. acaba de dejar?
                                  |
Why did you leave                 |¿Por qué dejó V. su
your place?                       |empleo?
                                  |
How long did you remain           |¿Cuánto tiempo estuvo
with her?                         |V. con ella?
                                  |
Will Mrs. L. give you             |¿Le dará a V. la
a character?                      |señora L. una recomendación
                                  |(un testimonio)?
                                  |
I have a written                  |Tengo una recomendación
character from                    |por escrito
Mrs. L.                           |de la señora L.
                                  |
Let me see it; I know             |Déjeme V. verla; conozco
her handwriting.                  |su letra.
                                  |
Do you like children?             |¿Le gustan a V. los niños?
                                  |
What wages do you expect?         |¿Qué salario pide V.?
                                  |
Mrs. L. gave me fifty             |La señora L. me daba
pesetas a month.                  |cincuenta pesetas
                                  |al mes.
                                  |
It is a great deal.               |Es mucho.
                                  |
But I think you will              |Pero creo que V. me
suit me.                          |convendrá.
                                  |
I engage you from                 |Le tomo a V. desde
this moment.                      |ahora mismo.
                                  |
You may come to-morrow.           |Podrá V. venir mañana.
                                  |
                                  |
_At the Hotel._                   |_En el Hotel._
                                  |
We require two rooms              |Necesitamos dos cuartos
with good beds.                   |con buenas
                                  |camas.
                                  |
Very well, Sir; will              |Muy bien, Señor;
you have the                      |¿quiere V. tener
kindness to follow                |la bondad de seguirme?
me?                               |
                                  |
On which floor have               |¿En qué piso tiene V.
you rooms disengaged?             |cuartos desocupados?
                                  |
There are some on the             |Hay algunos en el segundo,
second, consisting                |que consisten
of a drawing                      |en una sala
and a bedroom.                    |y un dormitorio.
                                  |
I have two splendid               |Tengo dos cuartos
rooms on the                      |magníficos en el
third floor.                      |tercer piso.
                                  |
Is there a lift?                  |¿Hay ascensor?
                                  |
Waiter, have a room               |Mozo, prepáreme V.
with a good bed                   |un cuarto con una
got ready for me.                 |buena cama.
                                  |
See that the bed is               |Vea V. que la cama
well aired.                       |esté bien aireada.
                                  |
Be careful that they              |Cuidado que se pongan
put clean sheets                  |sábanas limpias.
on.                               |
                                  |
The sheets are damp,              |Las sábanas están
I want some                       |húmedas, quiero
others.                           |otras.
                                  |
I should also like another        |Quisiera también otra
blanket.                          |manta.
                                  |
I don't mind much                 |Poco me importa el
what sort of room                 |cuarto que se me
I have, but I                     |dé, con tal que
want a good bed,                  |tenga buena cama
and to be able to                 |y pueda dormir
sleep quietly.                    |tranquilamente.
                                  |
Have a drawing and                |Prepárenos una sala y
a bedroom with                    |un dormitorio con
two beds made                     |dos camas; enciéndanos
ready for us;                     |también
have a fire lighted,              |un fuego tan
too, as quickly                   |pronto como posible.
as possible.                      |
                                  |
I shall take a warm               |Tomaré después un
bath afterwards.                  |baño caliente.
Where is the                      |¿Dónde está el
bath-room?                        |cuarto de baño?
                                  |
On the same floor as              |En el mismo piso que
your room.                        |su cuarto de V.
                                  |
Please have a cold                |Mande V. preparar
bath made ready                   |en seguida un
at once.                          |baño frío.
                                  |
Let my luggage be                 |Haga V. subir mi
brought up, and                   |equipaje, y no
don't forget the                  |olvide las toallas.
towels.                           |
                                  |
We want dinner at six             |Queremos comer a las
o'clock.                          |seis.
                                  |
Will you dine at table            |¿Quiere V. comer en
d'hôte at seven,                  |la mesa redonda
Sir?                              |a las siete?
                                  |
No, I shall dine with             |No, comeré con algunos
some friends in                   |amigos en
town and return                   |la cuidad y volveré
late.                             |tarde.
                                  |
It is very warm in this           |Hace mucho calor en
country. Have                     |este país. ¿Tiene
you any cooling                   |V. algunos refrescos?
drinks?                           |
                                  |
Please reserve us two             |Sírvase V. reservarnos
good seats at                     |dos buenos asientos
table d'hôte.                     |en la mesa
                                  |redonda.
                                  |
There is a bell at the            |Hay campanilla al
side of the chimney-piece.        |lado de la chimenea.
                                  |
Is there no electric bell?        |¿No hay timbre eléctrico?
                                  |
No, Sir, but we have              |No, Señor, pero tenemos
electric light in                 |luz eléctrica
all the rooms.                    |en todos los cuartos.
                                  |
I notice that there is            |Veo que no hay ni
neither soap nor                  |jabón ni agua
fresh water.                      |fresca.
                                  |
The servant will put              |La criada pondrá todo
everything in order               |en orden inmediatamente.
directly.                         |
                                  |
Please let me have my bill.       |Hágame V. el favor de la cuenta.
                                  |
Here is your account, Sir.        |Aquí tiene V. su cuenta, Señor.
                                  |
Very well, please receipt it.     |Muy bien, sírvase V. poner el recibí.
                                  |
Waiter here is something for you. |Mozo, aquí tiene V. para sí.
                                  |
                                  |
_The Money-changer._              |_El Cambista._
                                  |
Where could I get my              |¿Donde podría cambiar
money changed?                    |mi dinero?
                                  |
Where is the nearest              |¿Donde está la casa
money-changer's?                  |de cambio más
                                  |próxima?
                                  |
Is there a money-changer's        |¿Hay algún cambista
close                             |cerca de aquí?
by?                               |
                                  |
I wish to change some             |Quiero cambiar algún
English money.                    |dinero inglés.
                                  |
What do you give for              |¿A cómo paga V. la
a sovereign?                      |libra esterlina?
                                  |
Can you change me a               |¿Puede V. cambiarme
five-pound note?                  |un billete  de
                                  |banco de cinco
                                  |libras?
                                  |
What is the rate of               |¿A qué tipo está hoy
exchange to-day?                  |el cambio?
                                  |
I will take half in               |Tomaré la mitad en
silver.                           |plata.
                                  |
I should like a peseta's          |Quisiera una peseta
worth of coppers.                 |en calderilla.
                                  |
Could you cash me                 |¿Podría V. hacerme
this cheque on                    |efectivo este cheque
London?                           |sobre Londres?
                                  |
                                  |
_The Theatre._                    |_El Teatro._
                                  |
Is there a good theatre           |¿Hay en ésta un buen
(music-hall,                      |teatro (teatro de
picture-house) here?              |variedades, cine)?
                                  |
Which is the best                 |¿Cual es el mejor
theatre?                          |teatro?
                                  |
Is there a performance            |¿Hay función esta noche?
to-night?                         |
                                  |
What are they playing?            |¿Qué representan?
                                  |
What time does the                |¿A qué hora principia
performance begin?                |(es) la función?
                                  |
What time is the                  |¿A qué hora acaba
performance over?                 |(termina) la función?
                                  |
Is there a good orchestra?        |¿Hay buena orquesta?
                                  |
What are the prices?              |¿Cuáles son los precios
                                  |(de las localidades)?
                                  |
The boxes, the stalls,            |Los palcos, las butacas,
the circle, the                   |el anfiteatro,
gallery (the gods).               |la galería (el paraíso).
                                  |
What time does the                |¿A qué hora se abre la
box-office open?                  |taquilla?
                                  |
A ticket, a pass, a               |Un billete, un billete
pass-out check.                   |de favor, una contraseña.
                                  |
Let me have a programme,          |Hágame V. el favor
please,                           |de un programa,
and the book of                   |y el libreto.
words.                            |
                                  |
Can I hire a pair of              |¿Puedo alquilar unos
opera glasses?                    |gemelos?
                                  |
The interval.                     |El entreacto.
                                  |
The curtain.                      |El telón.
                                  |
                                  |
_The Seasons._                    |_Las Estaciones._
                                  |
Winter is over at last.           |Al fin se acabó el invierno.
                                  |
Do you like winter?               |¿Le gusta a V. el invierno?
                                  |
I like it as much as              |Me gusta tanto como
summer.                           |el verano.
                                  |
You are perhaps the               |V. será tal vez el
only one of that                  |único de esa opinión.
opinion.                          |
                                  |
In winter one is not              |En invierno no se está
comfortable except                |bien sino al lado
by the fireside.                  |del fuego.
                                  |
Can you skate?                    |¿Sabe V. patinar?
                                  |
Yes, a little.                    |Sí, un poco.
                                  |
Have you skated this              |¿Ha patinado V. este
winter?                           |invierno?
                                  |
The winter has been               |El invierno ha sido
very severe this                  |muy riguroso este
year.                             |año.
                                  |
I am glad to see the              |Me alegro de ver la
spring.                           |primavera.
                                  |
It is the season I like           |Es la estación que me
best.                             |gusta más.
                                  |
It is the most pleasant           |Es la más agradable
of all seasons.                   |de todas las estaciones.
                                  |
The season is very                |La estación está muy
backward.                         |atrasada.
                                  |
I fear we shall have              |Temo que tendremos
a very hot summer.                |un verano muy
                                  |caluroso.
                                  |
One would think that              |Se diría que las estaciones
the order of the                  |están todas
seasons had been                  |trastornadas.
reversed.                         |
                                  |
Summer is the season              |El verano es la estación
of the harvest.                   |de la cosecha.
                                  |
Summer is over.                   |Ya pasó el verano.
                                  |
After summer comes                |Después del verano
the autumn.                       |viene el otoño.
                                  |
Autumn is the season              |El otoño es la estación
of vintages.                      |de las vendimias.
                                  |
Towards the middle                |Hacia mediados del
of autumn the                     |otoño las mañanas
mornings and                      |y las tardes
evenings are cool.                |son frescas.
                                  |
Which season do you               |¿Cuál estación le
like best, Sir?                   |gusta a V. más,
                                  |Señor?
                                  |
Unquestionably, I like            |Sin duda alguna, me
the spring best.                  |gusta más la
                                  |primavera.
                                  |
Is it as hot in England           |¿Hace tanto calor en
as in Spain                       |Inglaterra como
in the summer?                    |en España en el verano?
                                  |
Never. It is not too              |Nunca. No hace demasiado
warm in summer                    |calor en
nor too cold in                   |el verano ni demasiado
winter.                           |frío en el
                                  |invierno.
                                  |
The winter in the                 |En el norte de España
north of Spain is                 |el invierno
almost as cold as                 |es casi tan frío
in England.                       |como en Inglaterra.
                                  |
No doubt, but for my              |Sin duda, pero por mi
part I should prefer              |parte preferiría el
the winter of                     |invierno del norte
Northern Spain                    |de España al de
to that of England,               |Inglaterra, especialmente
especially                        |al de
London, as it is                  |Londres, pues allí
very foggy there.                 |hace mucha niebla.
                                  |
You are right; it must            |V. tiene razón; se
be mentioned,                     |debe mencionar,
however, that the                 |sin embargo, que
fog is not so                     |la niebla no se
much due to the                   |debe tanto al
climate of that                   |clima de aquel
country as to                     |país como al enorme
the immense                       |consumo de
quantities of coal                |carbón que tiene
consumed daily in                 |lugar todos los
the dwellings and                 |días en las casas
numerous                          |particulares y
manufactories.                    |y en las muchas fábricas.
                                  |
I have read that as               |He leído que tan pronto
soon as a means of                |como se haya inventado
consuming the smoke               |un modo de consumir
is invented, London               |el humo, Londres
will have a very                  |tendrá un clima
agreeable climate.                |muy agradable.
                                  |
Let us hope that this             |Esperemos que
will soon be the                  |que sea
case.                             |pronto.
                                  |
                                  |
_The Weather._                    |_El Tiempo._
                                  |
How is the weather?               |¿Cómo está el tiempo?
                                  |
What sort of weather is it?       |¿Qué tiempo hace?
                                  |
Is it fine?                       |¿Hace buen tiempo?
                                  |
Yes, it is fine.                  |Sí, hace buen tiempo,
                                  |
It is beautiful weather.          |Hace un tiempo hermoso.
                                  |
It is charming weather.           |Hace un tiempo magnífico.
                                  |
It is most delightful weather.    |Hace un tiempo delicioso.
                                  |
The weather is settled.           |El tiempo se ha com puesto.
                                  |
                                  |
The weather is unsettled          |El tiempo está variable
(changeable).                     |(inconstante, inseguro, tornadizo).
                                  |
The weather is very close.        |El tiempo está muv pesado (bochornoso).
                                  |
It is getting cloudy.             |El cielo se encapota.
                                  |
It is cloudy.                     |Está nublado.
                                  |
It is bad weather.                |Hace mal tiempo.
                                  |
It is very bad weather.           |Hace muy mal tiempo.
                                  |
It is windy.                      |Hace viento.
                                  |
It is very windy.                 |Hace mucho viento.
                                  |
The wind drops.                   |Cede el viento.
                                  |
It is foggy.                      |Hace niebla.
                                  |
It is very foggy.                 |Hace mucha niebla.
                                  |
It is mild.                       |Está templado.
                                  |
It is cool.                       |Hace fresco.
                                  |
It is warm.                       |Hace calor.
                                  |
It is cold.                       |Hace frío.
                                  |
It is very-hot.                   |Hace mucho calor.
                                  |
It is very cold                   |Hace mucho frío.
                                  |
It is piercingly cold.            |Hace un frío penetrante.
                                  |
It is dry.                        |Está seco.
                                  |
It is damp.                       |Está húmedo.
                                  |
It is going to rain.              |Va a llover.
                                  |
I feel drops of rain.             |Siento gotas de lluvia.
                                  |
It rains. It is raining.          |Llueve. Está lloviendo.
                                  |
It rains (is raining)             |Llueve muy fuerte.
very fast (very hard).            |
It pours. It is pouring.          |Llueve a cántaros.
                                  |
It is only a shower.              |No es más que un chubasco.
                                  |
It does not rain.                 |No llueve.
It is not raining.                |
                                  |
The weather is stormy.            |El tiempo está tempestuoso (borrascoso).
                                  |
We shall have a storm.            |Tendremos tempestad.
                                  |
Do you hear the thunder?          |¿Oye V. los truenos?
                                  |
It thunders. It is                |Truena. Está tronando.
thundering.                       |
                                  |
The thunder roars.                |Suenan los truenos.
                                  |
It lightens.                      |Relampaguea. Está relampagueando.
It is lightening.                 |
                                  |
It has thundered and              |Ha tronado y relampagueado toda la noche.
lightened all night.              |
The weather is                    |El tiempo se está aclarando.
clearing up.                      |
It freezes.                       |Hiela.
It is freezing.                   |
It freezes (is freezing)          |Hiela muy fuerte.
very hard.                        |
                                  |
The river is frozen.              |El río está helado.
                                  |
We shall have snow.               |Tendremos nieve.
                                  |
There is much snow.               |Hay mucha nieve.
                                  |
It hails. It is hailing.          |Graniza. Está granizando.
                                  |
It thaws. It is thawing.          |Deshiela, Está deshelando.
                                  |
It is dusty.                      |Hace polvo.
                                  |
It is very dusty.                 |Hace mucho polvo.
                                  |
It snows. It is snowing.          |Nieva. Está nevando.
                                  |
I am very glad of it.             |Me alegro de ello.
                                  |
We shall go sleighing.            |Iremos a pasear en trineo.
                                  |
Have you a sleigh.                |¿Tiene V. trineo?
                                  |
It is good sleighing to-day.      |Hoy es buen día para pasear en trineo.
                                  |
The rain has laid the dust.       |La lluvia ha abatido el polvo.
                                  |
The pavement is slippery.         |La acera está resbaladiza.
                                  |
It is very bad walking.           |Se anda con dificultad.
                                  |
It is daylight.                   |Es de día.
                                  |
It is night.                      |Es de noche.
                                  |
It is dark.                       |Está oscuro.
                                  |
It is very dark.                  |Está muy oscuro.
                                  |
It is moonlight.                  |Hace luna.
                                  |
It is starlight.                  |Está estrellado.
                                  |
The days are drawing in.          |Los días disminuyen.
                                  |
The days begin to get             |Los días principian a
shorter.                          |disminuir.
                                  |
The days are very short.          |Los días son muy cortos.
                                  |
The days are lengthening.         |Los días aumentan.
                                  |
I am warm.                        |Tengo calor.
                                  |
I am cold.                        |Tengo frío.
                                  |
It is very cold.                  |Hace mucho frío.
                                  |
Are you warm?                     |¿Tiene V. calor?
                                  |
Are you cold?                     |¿Tiene V. frío?
                                  |
Are you not warm?                 |¿No tiene V. calor?
                                  |
Are you not cold?                 |¿No tiene V. frío?
                                  |
I am quite wet.                   |Estoy calado.
                                  |
I am wet through.                 |Estoy calado hasta los huesos.
                                  |
Dry your clothes.                 |Seque V. su ropa.
                                  |
We shall have a fine day.         |Tendremos buen día.
                                  |
The sun shines.                   |Hace sol.
                                  |
Look at that beautiful            |¡Vea V. ese hermoso
rainbow!                          |arco iris!
                                  |
What is the weather               |¿Qué tiempo hace
like to-day?                      |hoy?
                                  |
It is clear.                      |Está claro.
                                  |
It is very nice to-day.           |Está muy bueno hoy.
                                  |
What do you think of              |Como hace tan buen
a walk in the                     |tiempo, ¿qué piensa
fields, the weather               |V. de un paseo
being so fine?                    |en los campos?
                                  |
It seems to me rather             |El tiempo me parece
uncertain.                        |un poco incierto
                                  |(inseguro).
                                  |
What sort of weather              |¿Qué tal estaba el
had you in London                 |tiempo ayer en
yesterday                         |Londres cuando
when you left                     |salió V. de allá?
there?                            |
                                  |
It was very foggy, as             |Hacía mucha niebla,
is usual during                   |como de ordinario
this month.                       |en este mes.
                                  |
Is it true that in England        |¿Es verdad que en
the sun is                        |Inglaterra no se
invisible during a                |ve el sol durante
quarter of the                    |la cuarta parte
year?                             |del año?
                                  |
It is not so bad as               |No es tan malo como
that, but there are               |eso, pero hay días,
days, especially in               |especialmente en
November and                      |noviembre y febrero,
February, when                    |en que, con la
we cannot see the                 |niebla, no podemos
sun, nor even the                 |ver el sol, ni
lamps in the                      |tampoco los mismos
streets for the                   |faroles de las
fog.                              |calles.
                                  |
Is it possible?                   |¿Es posible?
                                  |
I hope we shall not               |Espero que no tendremos
have bad weather                  |mal tiempo
to-morrow.                        |mañana.
                                  |
It rained the whole               |Llovía todo el día que
day when we                       |fuimos al campo.
went into the                     |
country.                          |
                                  |
It does not rain now,             |Ya no llueve, volvamos
let us hurry back.                |de prisa.
                                  |
Has much snow fallen?             |¿Ha caído mucha nieve?
                                  |
Yes, the roads are                |Sí, los caminos están
covered with                      |cubiertos de nieve.
snow.                             |
                                  |
Snow has been falling             |Ha nevado toda la
during the whole                  |noche.
night.                            |
                                  |
There was no snow at              |El invierno pasado no
all last winter.                  |cayó ninguna nieve.
                                  |
Did you hear the thunder          |¿Oyó V. anoche los
last night?                       |truenos?
                                  |
Yes, it was a terrible            |Sí, era una tempestad
storm, and it                     |terrible, y llovía a
rained in torrents.               |mares.
                                  |
Do you think the river            |¿Cree V. que el río se
will soon freeze                  |helará pronto?
over?                             |
                                  |
I have no doubt that              |No dudo que podremos
we shall be able                  |patinar mañana
to skate to-morrow                |si continúa
if this frost                     |esta helada.
lasts.                            |
                                  |
Oh, yes, if it does not           |Ah, sí, si entretanto
thaw meanwhile.                   |no deshiela.
                                  |
                                  |
_Periods of Time._                |_Períodos de Tiempo._
                                  |
Come to-day.                      |Venga V. hoy.
                                  |
Go there on Christmas-day.        |Vaya V. allá el día
                                  |de Navidad.
                                  |
It is broad day-light.            |Está muy entrado el día.
                                  |
The day you are coming.           |El día que V. venga.
                                  |
To-day will be fine.              |Hará buen tiempo hoy.
                                  |
I rise in the morning             |Me levanto a las seis
at six o'clock.                   |de la mañana.
                                  |
Send it to me this                |Envíemelo V. esta mañana.
morning.                          |
                                  |
Come and spend the                |Venga V. a pasar la
evening at my                     |tarde en mi casa.
house.                            |
                                  |
I did it in the fore-noon.        |Lo hice antes de mediodía.
                                  |
I will do it to-morrow            |Lo haré mañana por
morning.                          |la mañana.
                                  |
I shall see you this              |Le veré a V. esta
afternoon.                        |tarde.
                                  |
I shall go and see him            |Iré a verle pasado
the day after to-morrow.          |mañana.
                                  |
I was there yesterday.            |Estuve allí ayer.
                                  |
He sent it to me two              |Me lo envió dos días
days after.                       |después.
                                  |
The next day I went there.        |Fuí allá al día siguiente.
                                  |
The next day I saw him.           |Le ví el día siguiente.
                                  |
Two days ago.                     |Hace dos días.
                                  |
A fortnight ago.                  |Hace quince días.
                                  |
It is three weeks since.          |Ya hace tres semanas.
                                  |
About that time.                  |Hacia aquel tiempo.
                                  |
Last month.                       |El mes pasado.
                                  |
Next month.                       |El mes que viene.
                                  |
Last year.                        |El año pasado.
                                  |
Next year.                        |El año próximo. El año que viene.
                                  |
The year one thousand             |El año mil novecientos
nine hundred and                  |quince.
fifteen.                          |
                                  |
I shall see you at Easter.        |Le veré a V. por Pascua.
                                  |
I shall move at mid-summer.       |Mudaré de casa el día de San Juan.
                                  |
At Michaelmas.                    |El día de San Miguel.
                                  |
The quarter is ended.             |Ha terminado el trimestre.
                                  |
The next quarter.                 |El próximo trimestre.
                                  |
The first of next month.          |El primero del mes que viene.
                                  |
The second of last month.         |El dos del mes pasado.
                                  |
The fourth of the                 |El cuatro del mes
present month.                    |actual.
                                  |
The last day of the month.        |El último día del mes.
                                  |
At the end of the month.          |Al fin del mes.
                                  |
At the end of the week.           |Al fin de la semana.
                                  |
Towards the middle of             |Hacia mediados del
the month.                        |mes.
                                  |
Last week.                        |La semana pasada.
                                  |
Next week.                        |La semana que viene.
                                  |
In a week.                        |En una semana.
                                  |
In a fortnight.                   |En quince días.
                                  |
This day week (time to come).     |De hoy en ocho.
                                  |
This day fortnight                |De hoy en quince.
(time to come).                   |
                                  |
This day week (time               |Hace una semana.
past).                            |Hace ocho días.
                                  |
This day fortnight                |Hace una quincena.
(time past).                      |Hace quince días.
                                  |
It will soon be a week            |Hará pronto una semana
since ...                         |que...
                                  |
We shall go there some day.       |Iremos allá algún día.
                                  |
One of these days.                |Un día de estos.
                                  |
He says he will pay               |Dice que le pagará a
you some day or                   |V. algún día.
other.                            |
                                  |
I do it daily.                    |Lo hago todos los días.
                                  |
Every day.                        |Todos los días. Cada día.
                                  |
Every other day.                  |Cada tercer día. Un día sí y otro no.
                                  |
A weekly paper.                   |Un semanal.
                                  |
A daily paper.                    |Un diario.
                                  |
                                  |
_Time and Dates._                 |_Horas y Fechas._
                                  |
Do you know what time it is?      |¿Sabe V. qué hora es?
                                  |
What time is it?                  |¿Qué hora es?
                                  |
I do not know.                    |No sé. No lo sé.
                                  |
Could you tell me the time?       |¿Podría V. decirme la hora que es?
                                  |
I cannot tell you exactly.        |No puedo decírselo exactamente.
                                  |
Yes, Sir; it is half-past six.    |Sí, Señor; son las seis y media.
                                  |
Will you kindly tell me           |¿Tiene V. la bondad
the time?                         |de decirme qué
                                  |hora es?
                                  |
What is the time by               |¿Qué hora es por su
your watch?                       |reloj de V.?
                                  |¿Qué hora tiene
                                  |V.?
                                  |
It is one o'clock.                |Es la una.
                                  |
It is nearly two o'clock.         |Son cerca de las dos.
                                  |
It is about two o'clock.          |Son las dos próximamente.
                                  |
It is half-past two.              |Son las dos y media.
                                  |
It is on the stroke of            |Van a dar las tres.
three.                            |Las tres están al
                                  |caer.
                                  |
It is ten minutes past            |Son las cinco y diez.
five.                             |
                                  |
It is a quarter past              |Son las siete y cuarto.
seven.                            |
                                  |
It is twenty minutes              |Son las ocho y veinte.
past eight.                       |
                                  |
It is a quarter to                |Son las once menos
eleven.                           |cuarto.
                                  |
It has just struck                |Acaban de dar las
twelve.                           |doce.
                                  |
It is noon.                       |Es mediodía.
                                  |
It is midnight.                   |Es medianoche.
                                  |
It is early.                      |Es temprano.
                                  |
It is late.                       |Es tarde.
                                  |
It is very late.                  |Es muy tarde.
                                  |
Come about nine                   |Venga V. a eso de las
o'clock.                          |nueve.
                                  |
Is your watch right?              |¿Va bien su reloj de V.?
                                  |
My watch is right.                |Mi reloj va bien.
                                  |
My watch is not right.            |Mi reloj no va bien.
                                  |
My watch is too fast.             |Mi reloj adelanta.
                                  |
My watch is too slow.             |Mi reloj atrasa.
                                  |
It gains a quarter of             |Adelanta un cuarto de
an hour every day.                |hora todos los días.
                                  |
It loses half-an-hour             |Atrasa media hora todos
every day.                        |los días.
                                  |
It has stopped.                   |Se ha parado.
                                  |
It stops now and then.            |Se para de cuando en cuando.
                                  |
It does not go.                   |No anda.
                                  |
Look at your watch.               |Mire V. su reloj.
                                  |
It is not wound up.               |No tiene cuerda.
                                  |
I forgot to wind it up.           |He olvidado darle cuerda.
                                  |
It is out of order.               |Está  desarreglado (descompuesto).
                                  |
Something is broken               |Se le ha roto algo.
in it.                            |
                                  |
The mainspring is                 |Se ha roto el muelle
broken.                           |real.
                                  |
I think the chain is              |Creo que se ha roto
broken.                           |la cadena.
                                  |
Have it mended.                   |Mándelo V. componer.
                                  |
I am going to send                |Voy a mandarlo al
it to the watch-maker.            |relojero.
                                  |
Send it to ...                    |Mándelo a...
                                  |
He is a good watch-maker.         |Es buen relojero.
                                  |
Yes, but he charges               |Sí, pero cobra demasiado.
too much.                         |
                                  |
It is true, but you can           |Es verdad, pero se
rely on what he                   |puede fiar en lo
does.                             |que hace.
                                  |
I bought this watch               |Compré este reloj en
in Switzerland.                   |Suiza.
                                  |
Tell me the time the              |Dígame V. a qué hora
train for ... is going            |saldrá el tren para...
to start.                         |
It will start at half-past        |Saldrá a la una y
one.                              |media.
                                  |
I must leave at three             |Tendré que marcharme
o'clock in the                    |a las tres de la
afternoon.                        |tarde.
                                  |
My friend will arrive             |Mi amigo llegará por
by the Northern                   |el ferrocarril del
Railway at four                   |Norte mañana por
o'clock to-morrow                 |la mañana a las
morning.                          |cuatro.
                                  |
What is the date of               |¿Cuál es la fecha de
the letter you                    |(¿De qué fecha es)
have in your                      |la carta que tiene
hand?                             |V. en la mano?
                                  |
How is the letter                 |¿Qué fecha tiene la
dated which you                   |carta que ha recibido
have received                     |V. de su
from your brother                 |hermano en...?
in...?                            |
                                  |
His letter bears the              |Su carta tiene la fecha
date fifth of January,            |de 5 de enero de
1915.                             |1915.
                                  |
What is the date to-day?          |¿A cuántos estamos hoy?
                                  |
What day of the                   |¿A cuántos estamos
month is it?                      |del mes?
                                  |
What day of the                   |¿A cuántos del mes
month is this?                    |estamos hoy?
                                  |
It is the fifteenth of            |Estamos a quince de
March.                            |marzo.
                                  |
To-day is the sixteenth.          |Hoy estamos a dieciseis.
                                  |
To-day is the nineteenth          |Hoy es día diecinueve
of February.                      |de febrero.
                                  |
Is it the first of the            |¿Es el primero del
month?                            |mes?
                                  |
No, it is the second.             |No, es el dos.
                                  |
I think it is the fifth.          |Creo que estamos a cinco.
                                  |
When will the races               |¿Cuándo tendrán lugar
take place--in the                |las carreras--por
morning or in the                 |la mañana o
evening?                          |por la tarde?
                                  |
At noon.                          |A mediodía.
                                  |
When do you expect                |¿Cuando espera V.
to return from                    |volver de su
your journey?                     |viaje?
                                  |
I shall return by the             |Volveré por el vapor
steamer "Queen"                   |"Reina," que deberá
which is due on                   |llegar el
the first of April.               |primero de abril.
                                  |
                                  |
_News._                           |_Noticias._
                                  |
Is there any news to-day?         |¿Hay noticias hoy?
                                  |
Is there anything new?            |¿Hay algo de nuevo?
                                  |
Do you know anything new?         |¿Sabe V. algo de nuevo?
                                  |
What is the news?                 |¿Qué hay de nuevo?
                                  |
What news is there?               |¿Qué noticias hay?
                                  |
What news do you                  |¿Que noticias nos trae
bring us?                         |V.?
                                  |
Have you not got anything         |¿No tiene V. nada de
fresh to tell us?                 |nuevo que decirnos?
                                  |
Have you not heard                |¿No ha oído V. nada
of anything new?                  |de nuevo?
                                  |
What do they talk                 |¿Qué se dice en la
about in the town?                |ciudad?
                                  |
What is the news in               |¿Qué se dice en su
your neighbourhood?               |localidad de V.?
                                  |
I know nothing new.               |No sé nada de nuevo.
                                  |
There is nothing new.             |No hay nada de nuevo.
                                  |
There is no news.                 |No hay noticias.
                                  |
I have not heard of               |No he oído nada.
anything.                         |
                                  |
There is nothing fresh            |No se dice nada de
talked about.                     |nuevo.
                                  |
There is good news.               |Hay buenas noticias.
                                  |
The news is good.                 |La noticias son buenas.
                                  |
There is bad news.                |Hay malas noticias.
                                  |
The news is very bad.             |Las noticias son muy malas.
                                  |
This is good news.                |Esta noticia es buena.
                                  |
This is bad news.                 |Esta noticia es mala.
                                  |
I have heard that...              |He oído decir que...
                                  |
I did not hear of that.           |No he oído hablar de eso.
                                  |
Did you read the papers?          |¿Ha leído V. los periódicos?
                                  |
What do the papers say?           |¿Qué dicen los periódicos?
                                  |
I have not read the               |No he leído los periódicos
papers to-day.                    |hoy.
                                  |
Did you see that in               |¿Ha visto V. eso en
any paper?                        |algún periódico?
                                  |
It is only mentioned              |Se hace mención de
in a private letter.              |ello sólamente en
                                  |una carta particular.
                                  |
Do they say who received          |¿Se dice quién recibió
the letter?                       |la carta?
                                  |
This news wants                   |Esta noticia necesita
confirmation.                     |confirmación.
                                  |
From whom have you                |¿De quién tiene V.
had that news?                    |esa noticia?
                                  |
How do you know that?             |¿Cómo sabe V. eso?
                                  |
I have it on good                 |Lo sé de buena tinta.
authority.                        |
                                  |
That news has not                 |Esa noticia no se ha
been confirmed.                   |confirmado.
                                  |
That report has                   |Ese rumor resulta ser
proved false.                     |falso.
                                  |
That is no longer                 |Ya no se habla más
talked of.                        |de eso.
                                  |
Do they still talk of             |Se habla todavía de
war?                              |guerra?
                                  |
Do they think we                  |¿Se cree que tendremos
shall have peace?                 |paz?
                                  |
It is not likely.                 |No es probable.
                                  |
Have you heard from               |¿Ha recibido V. noticias
your brother?                     |de su hermano?
                                  |
Have you heard lately             |¿Ha recibido V. últimamente
from your                         |noticias
friend?                           |de su amigo?
                                  |
Is it long since he               |¿Hace mucho (tiempo)
wrote to you?                     |que no le escribe
                                  |a V.?
                                  |
I have not heard from             |Hace dos meses que
him for two                       |no tengo noticias
months.                           |de él.
                                  |
He has not written                |Hace tres semanas
for these three                   |que no me escribe.
weeks.                            |
                                  |
I expect to hear from             |Espero noticias de él.
him.                              |
                                  |
                                  |
What does he say to               |¿Que le dice a V. de
you about Madrid?                 |Madrid?
                                  |
He gives me a description         |Me da una descripción
of most                           |de la mayor
of the curiosities                |parte de las
of that city.                     |curiosidades de
                                  |esa ciudad.
                                  |
Is he pleased with                |¿Le gusta Madrid?
Madrid?                           |
                                  |
He is enjoying himself            |Tanto se divierte allí
self so much there                |que no dice nada
that he does not                  |de volver.
speak of returning.               |
                                  |
                                  |
_Age._                            |_Edad._
                                  |
How old are you?                  |¿Cuántos años tiene V.?
                                  |
What is your age?                 |¿Qué edad tiene V. ?
                                  |
What may be his age?              |¿Qué edad tendrá él?
                                  |
How old may he be?                |¿Cuántos años tendrá él?
                                  |
He will be twelve the             |Tendrá doce años el
fifteenth of next                 |quince del mes
month.                            |que viene.
                                  |
I shall soon be ten.              |Tendrá pronto diez
                                  |años.
                                  |
I am twenty-five.                 |Tengo veinticinco
                                  |años.
                                  |
How old is your father?           |¿Cuántos años tiene su padre de V.?
                                  |
What is your                      |¿Qué edad tiene su
brother's age?                    |hermano de V.?
                                  |
How old is your                   |¿Cuántos años tiene
brother?                          |su hermano de V.?
                                  |
He is not yet twenty.             |No ha cumplido todavía los veinte.
                                  |
He is not yet of age.             |No es todavía mayor de edad.
                                  |
He is still under age.            |Aun es menor.
                                  |
How old may that child be?        |¿Cuántos años tendrá ese niño?
                                  |
He is only six years old.         |Tiene sólamente seis años.
                                  |
He is tall for his age.           |Es alto para su edad.
                                  |
How old is your sister?           |¿Cuantos años tiene su hermana de V.?
                                  |
She is more than seven.           |Tiene más de siete años.
                                  |
She is almost eight.              |Tiene casi ocho años.
                                  |
She is twenty.                    |Tiene veinte años.
                                  |
She is in the flower of           |Está en la flor de su
her youth.                        |juventud.
                                  |
Your uncle must be                |Se tío de V. debe de
very nearly forty                 |tener cerca de
years old.                        |cuarenta años.
                                  |
He is in his forty-second         |Ha entrado en los cuarenta
year.                             |y dos años.
                                  |
He is in the prime of             |Está en la flor de la
life.                             |edad.
                                  |
Your grandfather                  |Su abuelo de V.
looks very aged.                  |parece muy viejo.
                                  |
How old do you think              |¿Cuántos años le parece
he is?                            |a V. que tiene?
                                  |
How old would you                 |¿Cuántos años le echaría
take him to be?                   |V.?
                                  |
He cannot be more                 |No puede tener más
than eighty.                      |que ochenta años.
                                  |
He is eighty-four.                |Tiene ochenta y cuatro años.
                                  |
He is older than I.               |Tiene más años que yo.
                                  |
I did not think him so            |No le creía tan viejo.
old.                              |
                                  |
He carries his age well.          |No representa su edad.
                                  |
Is your father still              |¿Vive todavía su padre
living?                           |de V.?
                                  |
He must be very old.              |Debe ser muy viejo.
                                  |
He is just entering               |Acaba de entrar en los
his hundredth year.               |cien años.
                                  |
He has become quite               |Se ha vuelto niño.
childish.                         |
                                  |
                                  |
_Asking and Giving_               |_Pedir y Dar Consejo._
_Advice._                         |
                                  |
What shall we do?                 |¿Qué haremos?
                                  |
What must we do?                  |¿Qué debemos hacer?
                                  |
What are we to do?                |¿Qué hemos de hacer?
                                  |
What remains for us               |¿Qué nos queda que
to do?                            |hacer?
                                  |
What is to be done?               |¿Qué se ha de hacer?
                                  |
We must decide something.         |Tendremos que tomar
                                  |alguna resolución.
                                  |
I am quite puzzled.               |Estoy muy perplejo.
                                  |
I do not know what to do.         |No sé qué hacer.
                                  |
I am greatly embarrassed.         |Estoy en el mayor embarazo.
                                  |
We are very much                  |Estamos muy perplejos.
perplexed.                        |
                                  |
If I were you.                    |Si fuera V. Yo que V.
                                  |
If I were in your                 |Si estuviera en su
place.                            |lugar de V.
                                  |
I advise you to...                |Le aconsejo a V. que...
                                  |
I am of opinion that              |Soy de opinión que V.
you should go                     |debe ir allá.
there.                            |
                                  |
If you will take my               |Si quiere V. seguir mi
advice you will                   |consejo, lo hará.
do it.                            |
                                  |
An idea strikes me.               |Se me ocurre una idea.
                                  |
I have been thinking              |He pensado en eso.
of that.                          |
                                  |
A thought has struck me.          |Me ha ocurrido una idea.
                                  |
Let me alone.                     |Déjeme V. en paz.
                                  |
Let us do one thing.              |Hagamos una cosa.
                                  |
I have changed my mind.           |He mudado de opinión.
                                  |
Let us do something else.         |Hagamos otra cosa.
                                  |
We must go another                |Tendremos que emprenderlo
way to work.                      |de otro modo.
                                  |
What do you say                   |¿Qué dice V. de ello?
about it?                         |¿Qué le parece a V.?
                                  |
What do you think of it?          |¿Qué piensa V. (opina V.) de ello?
                                  |
I think as you do.                |Opino como V.
                                  |
It is very well thought           |Está muy bien pensado.
out.                              |
                                  |
It is very well imagined.         |Está muy bien concebido.
                                  |
It is a good idea.                |Es buena idea.
                                  |
It is a very good idea.           |Es muy buena idea.
                                  |
I am of your opinion.             |Soy de la opinión de V.
                                  |
It is the best way.               |Es el mejor modo.
                                  |
Would it not be better...?        |¿No sería mejor...?
                                  |
It is the best we can do.         |Es lo mejor que podemos hacer.
                                  |
It is the only thing              |Es la única cosa que
we have to do.                    |nos queda que hacer.
                                  |
That is the only                  |Ese es el único partido
course we can take.               |que podemos tomar.
                                  |
                                  |
_Affirming and_                   |_Afirmar y Negar._
_Denying._                        |
                                  |
I am going to tell you            |Voy a decirle a V.
that...                           |que...
                                  |
I assure you that...              |Le aseguro a V. que...
                                  |
That I assure you.                |Eso se lo aseguro a V.
                                  |
That I can assure you.            |Eso se lo puedo asegurar a V.
                                  |
You may rely upon                 |Puede V. fiarse en lo
what I tell you.                  |que le digo.
                                  |
There is no doubt about it.       |No cabe duda.
                                  |
You are right.                    |Tiene V. razón.
                                  |
You are quite right.              |Está V. muy en lo cierto.
                                  |
Yes. No.                          |Sí. No.
                                  |
I say it is.                      |Digo que sí.
                                  |
I say it is not.                  |Digo que no.
                                  |
I maintain that it is so.         |Sostengo que es así.
                                  |
I maintain that it is             |Sostengo que no es
not so.                           |así.
                                  |
I suppose so.                     |Supongo que sí.
                                  |
I suppose not.                    |Supongo que no.
                                  |
I should say so.                  |Me parece que sí.
                                  |
Certainly.                        |Cierto que sí.
                                  |
Certainly not.                    |Cierto que no.
                                  |
You may well think that...        |Bien puede V. pensar que...
                                  |
You may easily think              |V. puede fácilmente
that...                           |creer que...
                                  |
Do you think so?                  |¿Lo cree V.? ¿Lo
                                  |cree V. así?
                                  |
I think so.                       |Lo creo. Así lo creo.
                                  |
I think so too.                   |Yo lo creo también.
                                  |
I should think so!                |¡Ya lo creo!
                                  |
I think not.                      |Creo que no.
                                  |
I do not think so.                |No lo creo.
                                  |
I should think not indeed!        |¡Eso sí que no!
                                  |
You must know that...             |V. debe saber que...
                                  |
I must tell you...                |Debo decirle a V....
                                  |
I am inclined to think...         |Me inclino a creer...
                                  |
I dare say it is so.              |No dudo que será así.
                                  |
What do you mean?                 |¿Qué quiere V. decir?
                                  |
I do not know what                |No sé lo que V. quiere
you mean.                         |decir.
                                  |
Is it certain that...?            |¿Es cierto que...?
                                  |
Is it true that...?               |¿Es verdad que...?
                                  |
Yes, it is true.                  |Sí, es verdad.
                                  |
It is quite true.                 |Es muy verdad.
                                  |
It is positive.                   |Es positivo.
                                  |
It is only too true.              |Es demasiado cierto.
                                  |
It is a fact.                     |Es un hecho.
                                  |
It is an absolute fact.           |Es un hecho positivo.
                                  |
Are you sure of what              |¿Está V. seguro de lo
you say?                          |que dice?
                                  |
Would you believe that...?        |¿Querrá V. creer que...?
                                  |
I could believe it.               |Podría creerlo.
                                  |
Do you believe it?                |¿Lo cree V.?
                                  |
I believe it.                     |Lo creo.
                                  |
I believe so too.                 |Yo lo creo también.
                                  |
That I believe.                   |Eso lo creo yo.
                                  |
Do not believe it.                |No lo crea V.
                                  |
I do not believe it.              |No lo creo.
                                  |
I do not believe a                |No creo ni una palabra
word of it.                       |de ello.
                                  |
I emphatically deny it.           |Lo niego rotundamente.
                                  |
No such thing.                    |No hay tal cosa.
                                  |
Are you quite sure of it?         |¿Está V. seguro de ello?
                                  |
Nothing is more certain.          |Nada hay más cierto.
                                  |
I answer for it.                  |Respondo de ello.
                                  |
I could not answer for it.        |No podría responder de ello.
                                  |
You may believe it.               |Puede V. creerlo.
                                  |
It cannot be true.                |No puede ser verdad.
                                  |
You are mistaken.                 |Se engaña V. Se equivoca V.
                                  |
It is not true.                   |No es verdad.
                                  |
It is a fib.                      |Es mentira (cuento, historia).
                                  |
It is a pure invention.           |Es pura invención.
                                  |
There is nothing more             |Nada hay más falso.
untrue.                           |
                                  |
I affirm that....                 |Afirmo que...
                                  |
I give you my word                |Doy a V. mi palabra.
for it.                           |
                                  |
Upon my honour.                   |Palabra de honor.
                                  |
Upon my word of honour.           |Bajo mi palabra de honor.
                                  |
Is it really true?                |¿Es eso verdad?
                                  |
I can hardly believe it.          |Apenas si puedo creerlo.
                                  |
I heard it said.                  |Lo he oído decir.
                                  |
Everybody says so.                |Todo el mundo lo dice.
                                  |
We must not always                |No se debe creer
give credit to all                |siempre todo lo
we hear people                    |se dice.
say.                              |
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Surprise._                       |_Sorpresa._
                                  |
What!                             |¡Cómo!
                                  |
Truly!                            |¡En verdad!
                                  |
Really!                           |¡De veras!
                                  |
Is it possible!                   |¡Es posible!
                                  |
Could it be possible!             |¡Será posible!
                                  |
Is it really possible!            |¡Pero es posible!
                                  |
How can that be!                  |¡Cómo puede ser eso!
                                  |
How is that possible!             |¡Cómo es posible eso!
                                  |
That is impossible!               |¡Eso es imposible!
                                  |
It is not possible!               |¡No es posible!
                                  |
That cannot be!                   |¡Eso no puede ser!
                                  |
I cannot think how...!            |¡No puedo figurarme cómo...!
                                  |
I am surprised!                   |¡Me extraño!
                                  |
I am quite astonished!            |¡Me extraño mucho!
                                  |
That surprises me!                |¡Eso me extraña!
                                  |
You surprise me!                  |¡V. me sorprende!
                                  |
You astonish me!                  |¡V. me asombra!
                                  |
This is what surprises me!        |¡Esto es lo que me sorprende!
                                  |
That quite astonishes me!         |¡Eso me sorprende mucho!
                                  |
I wonder at it!                   |¡Me admiro de ello!
                                  |
This is quite astonishing!        |¡Esto es muy sorprendente!
                                  |
It is incredible                  |
(inconceivable)!                  |¡Es increíble (inconcebible)!
                                  |
It is a thing not to              |¡Es cosa que no se
be conceived!                     |puede concebir!
                                  |
That is unheard of!               |¡Eso es inaudito!
                                  |
It is a thing unheard of!         |¡Es cosa inaudita!
                                  |
It is strange!                    |¡Es extraño! ¡Es raro!
                                  |
That is very strange!             |¡Eso es muy extraño!
                                  |
That is a strange sort            |¡Es por cierto cosa
of business indeed!               |bastante extraña!
                                  |
How strange!                      |¡Qué raro!
                                  |
What a strange (an                |¡Qué cosa más rara
extraordinary)                    |(tan extraordinaria)!
thing!                            |
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Probability._                    |_Probabilidad._
                                  |
That is probable.                 |Eso es probable.
                                  |
That is very likely.              |Eso es muy verosímil.
                                  |
It is likely enough.              |Es bastante verosímil.
                                  |
That is not unlikely.             |Eso no es inverosímil.
                                  |
That is hardly probable.          |Eso no es muy probable.
                                  |
That is not probable.             |Eso no es probable.
                                  |
That is very probable.            |Eso es muy probable.
                                  |
That is more than probable.       |Eso es más que probable.
                                  |
It is very possible.              |Es muy posible.
                                  |
There is nothing impossible       |Nada tiene de imposible.
in it.                            |
                                  |
That is not impossible.           |Eso no es imposible.
                                  |
I see nothing impossible          |No veo en ello nada
in it.                            |de imposible.
                                  |
Perhaps.                          |Tal vez.
                                  |
Perhaps so.                       |Puede que sí.
                                  |
That may be.                      |Eso puede ser.
                                  |
That might be so.                 |Eso podría ser.
                                  |
I do not wonder at it.            |No me admiro de ello.
                                  |
I am not surprised at it.         |No me causa extrañeza.
                                  |
That does not astonish me.        |Eso no me asombra.
                                  |
That does not surprise            |Eso no me sorprende.
me.                               |
                                  |
It is not astonishing.            |No es asombroso.
                                  |
It is not surprising.             |No es sorprendente.
                                  |
There is nothing surprising       |Nada hay de sorprendente
in it.                            |en ello.
                                  |
You do not surprise me.           |V. no me sorprende.
                                  |
I should not wonder at it.        |No me causaría extrañeza.
                                  |
That would not surprise me.       |Eso no me sorprendería.
                                  |
There would be nothing            |Nada tendría de particular.
extraordinary                     |
about it.                         |
                                  |
It is quite natural.              |Es muy natural.
                                  |
Of course.                        |Naturalmente. Por de contado.
                                  |
No wonder.                        |No hay que extrañar.
                                  |
It is a matter of course.         |Es cosa natural. Es de cajón.
                                  |
That is understood.               |Eso se entiende.
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Sorrow._                         |_Sentimiento._
                                  |
I am sorry for it.                |Lo siento.
                                  |
I am very sorry for it.           |Lo siento mucho.
                                  |
I am extremely sorry              |Lo siento muchísimo
for it.                           |(infinito).
                                  |
How sorry I am for it!            |¡Cuánto lo siento!
                                  |
I am inconsolable.                |Estoy inconsolable.
                                  |
It makes me quite unhappy.        |Me causa mucho pesar.
                                  |
It vexes me beyond                |Me contraria más de
expression.                       |lo podría decir.
                                  |
It is a pity.                     |Es lástima.
                                  |
It is a great pity.               |Es una gran lástima.
                                  |
It is a real pity.                |Es una verdadera lástima.
                                  |
What a pity!                      |¡Qué lástima!
                                  |
It is a sad thing.                |Es cosa triste.
                                  |
It is a painful case.             |Es un caso doloroso.
                                  |
That is very vexing.              |Eso es muy molesto.
                                  |
That is very disagreeable.        |Eso es muy desagradable.
                                  |
It is very sad.                   |Es muy triste.
                                  |
It is a cruel case.               |Es un caso cruel.
                                  |
That is very hard.                |Eso es muy duro.
                                  |
This is shocking.                 |Esto es espantoso.
                                  |
That is very unfortunate.         |Eso es muy desgraciado.
                                  |
It is a great misfortune.         |Es una gran desgracia.
                                  |
It is very regrettable.           |Es muy sensible.
                                  |
It is dreadful.                   |Es horrible.
                                  |
It is terrible.                   |Es terrible.
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Joy._                            |_Alegría._
                                  |
I am very pleased.                |Estoy satisfechísimo (contentísimo).
                                  |
I am very glad.                   |Me alegro mucho.
                                  |
I am very happy.                  |Estoy muy contento.
                                  |
I am delighted.                   |Estoy encantado.
                                  |
I am extremely happy              |Me alegro mucho de
to hear it.                       |saberlo.
                                  |
They are very glad of it.         |Se alegran mucho de ello.
                                  |
We congratulate you               |Felicitamos a V. por
on it.                            |ello.
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Blame._                          |_Censura._
                                  |
Shame!                            |¡Vergüenza!
                                  |
Are you not ashamed?              |¿No tiene V. vergüenza?
                                  |
Are you not ashamed               |¿No se avergüenza
of yourself?                      |V.?
                                  |
You ought to be ashamed.          |Debiera V. avergonzarse.
                                  |
I am ashamed of you.              |Tengo vergüenza de V.
                                  |
What a shame!                     |¡Qué vergüenza!
                                  |
It is shameful.                   |Es vergonzoso.
                                  |
It is a shameful thing.           |Es cosa vergonzosa.
                                  |
It is very bad.                   |Es muy malo.
                                  |
How naughty that is!              |¡Qué feo es eso!
                                  |
That is very wicked.              |Eso es muy perverso.
                                  |
It is abominable.                 |Es abominable.
                                  |
How can you be so wicked?         |¿Cómo puede V. ser tan malvado?
                                  |
How could you do so?              |¿Cómo ha podido V. hacer eso?
                                  |
How came you to do so?            |¿Cómo ha llegado V. a hacerlo?
                                  |
You are very wicked.              |V. es muy malo.
                                  |
Why did you do that?              |¿Por qué ha hecho V. eso?
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Anger._                          |_Cólera._
                                  |
I am very angry.                  |Estoy muy enfadado.
                                  |
I am not in a good humour.        |No estoy de buen humor.
                                  |
He is very cross.                 |Está muy enojado.
                                  |
I am cross with you.              |Estoy enfadado con V.
                                  |
I am offended.                    |Estoy ofendido.
                                  |
I am exasperated.                 |Estoy exasperado.
                                  |
I am beside myself.               |Estoy fuera de mí.
                                  |
You see me in a terrible          |V. me ve que estoy
passion.                          |muy encolerizado.
                                  |
It makes me quite mad.            |Me pone furioso.
                                  |
That is very wrong of you.        |Eso está muy mal en V.
                                  |
You are very much to              |V. tiene mucha culpa.
blame.                            |
                                  |
You are quite wrong.              |V. está muy equivocado.
                                  |
How did you dare to               |¿Cómo se ha atrevido
do so?                            |V. a hacerlo?
                                  |
I am not satisfied with           |No estoy contento con
you.                              |V.
                                  |
I am quite displeased             |Estoy muy descontento
with you.                         |con V.
                                  |
I shall be very angry.            |Estaré muy enfadado.
                                  |
Be quiet.                         |Estése V. quieto.
                                  |
Will you soon have done?          |¿Acabará V. pronto?
                                  |
Can you not be quiet?             |¿No puede V. estarse quieto?
                                  |
I tell you beforehand             |Le prevengo a V.
that....                          |que...
                                  |
I warn you that....               |Le advierto a V. que...
                                  |
I warn you of it.                 |Se lo advierto a V.
                                  |
Pay attention to what             |Atienda V. a lo que
I say.                            |le digo.
                                  |
Mind what I have                  |Tenga V. presente lo
told you.                         |que le he dicho.
                                  |
I will not have that.             |No quiero eso.
                                  |
I will not suffer that.           |No permitiré eso.
                                  |
I will have it so.                |Lo quiero así.
                                  |
I insist upon it.                 |Insisto en ello.
                                  |
Mind it does not happen           |Cuidado que no pase
again.                            |otra vez.
                                  |
Do not do so any more.            |No vuelva V. a hacerlo más.
                                  |
Don't be impertinent.             |No sea V. impertinente.
                                  |
Silence! hold your tongue.        |¡Silencio! cállese V.
                                  |
Will you hold your tongue?        |¿Quiere V. callarse?
                                  |
No arguing.                       |Nada de razones.
                                  |
Don't answer.                     |No responda V.
                                  |
Get out quickly.                  |Váyase V. pronto.
                                  |
I will see you no more.           |No quiero verle a V. más.
                                  |
Your conduct is inexcusable.      |Su conducta de V. es inexcusable.
                                  |
This is not the first             |Esta no es la primera
time you have                     |vez que V. me ha
annoyed me.                       |contrariado.
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Antipathy and Aversion._         |_Antipatía y Aversión._
                                  |
I do not like that man.           |No me gusta aquel hombre.
                                  |
I detest that man.                |Detesto a ese hombre.
                                  |
I cannot bear him.                |No puedo sufrirle.
                                  |
His manners are repellent.        |Sus modales son repugnantes.
                                  |
He has not a pleasing             |No tiene cara agradable.
countenance.                      |
                                  |
His looks are not                 |Su semblante no es
prepossessing.                    |simpático.
                                  |
There is something                |Hay algo de repugnante
displeasing in his                |en sus modales.
manners.                          |
                                  |
I cannot restrain the             |No puedo reprimir la
aversion I feel for               |aversión que siento
him.                              |para él.
                                  |
He has no notion of               |No tiene idea de la
propriety.                        |delicadeza.
                                  |
He has no regard for              |No tiene respeto para
anybody.                          |nadie.
                                  |
That makes him hated.             |Eso le hace odioso.
                                  |
He is hated by everybody.         |Todo el mundo le aborrece.
                                  |
I avoid him as much               |Le huyo cuanto puedo.
as I can.                         |
                                  |
He bores me much.                 |Me aburre mucho.
                                  |
His language is offensive.        |Su lenguaje es ofensivo.
                                  |
He talks most extravagantly.      |Habla con mucha extravagancia.
                                  |
He likes to dictate               |Le gusta mandar a
to everyone.                      |todo el mundo.
                                  |
What an insupportable being!      |¡Qué hombre tan insoportable!
                                  |
What a tiresome person!           |¡Qué sujeto tan molesto!
                                  |
Shall we never be able            |¿No podremos deshacernos
to get rid of him?                |nunca de él?
                                  |
I wish he would go.               |Quisiera que se fuese.
                                  |
At last he has gone.              |Por fin se ha marchado.
                                  |
I would rather have               |Antes aceptaría la palabra
the word of an                    |de un hombre
honest man than                   |honrado que el
his oath.                         |juramento de ése.
                                  |
The hatred of that                |El odio de ese hombre
man is less                       |es menos peligroso
dangerous than                    |de lo que
you think.                        |V. piensa.
                                  |
                                  |
_Expressions of_                  |_Expresiones de_
_Sympathy and Friendship._        |_Simpatía y Amistad._
                                  |
He is my friend.                  |Es mi amigo.
                                  |
He is a friend of mine.           |Es amigo mío.
                                  |
He is my best friend.             |Es mi mejor amigo.
                                  |
He is my intimate friend.         |Es mi amigo íntimo.
                                  |
We are intimate friends.          |Somos amigos íntimos.
                                  |
I am sincerely attached           |Le quiero sinceramente.
to him.                           |
                                  |
Our friendship is                 |Nuestra amistad es
reciprocal.                       |recíproca.
                                  |
Our dispositions are              |Somos del mismo
alike.                            |carácter.
                                  |
We are closely united.            |Somos estrechamente unidos.
                                  |
We agree perfectly well.          |Nos entendemos perfectamente.
                                  |
He has given me                   |Me ha dado muchas
many proofs of                    |pruebas de su
his friendship.                   |amistad.
                                  |
I hope we shall never             |Espero que jamás nos
part.                             |separaremos.
                                  |
I felt an attachment              |He simpatizado con
for him the first                 |él desde la primera
time I met him.                   |vez que le vi.
                                  |
We love each other                |Nos queremos como
like brothers.                    |hermanos.
                                  |
There is no secret                |No nos ocultamos nada.
between us.                       |
                                  |
We have no secrets                |No tenemos secretos
from each other.                  |el uno para el otro.
                                  |
I would do anything               |Haría cualquier cosa
for him.                          |por él.
                                  |
He is very attentive              |Es muy obsequioso
to me.                            |para conmigo.
                                  |
Nobody esteems you                |Nadie le aprecia a V.
more than I do.                   |más que yo.
                                  |
He is the best of my              |Es el mejor de mis
friends.                          |amigos.
                                  |
                                  |
_Correspondence._                 |_Correspondencia._
                                  |
Mr. (or Esq.)                     |Sr. (or Sr. D. before a
                                  |Christian name or
                                  |its initial).
                                  |
Messrs.                           |Sres. (Sres. D. is seldom used).
                                  |
Mrs.                              |Sra. (or Sra. Da. as above).
                                  |
Miss                              |Srta. (or Srta. Da.).
                                  |
Sir, Dear Sir,                    |Muy Sr. mío: Muy Sr. nuestro:
                                  |
Dear Sirs, Gentlemen,             |Muy Sres. míos: Muy Sres. nuestros:
                                  |
Madam, Dear Madam,                |Muy Sra. mía: Muy Srta. mía:
                                  |
My dear Sir,                      |Muy Sr. mío y amigo:
                                  |
Dear father,                      |Querido padre:
                                  |
Dear mother,                      |Querida madre:
                                  |
My dear friend,                   |Mi querido amigo: Mi querida amiga.
                                  |
                                  |
_To begin a Letter._              |_Principiar una Carta._
                                  |
I beg to inform you ...           |Tengo el honor de informarle(s)...
                                  |
We take the liberty of            |Nos tomamos la libertad
informing you ...                 |de informarle(s)...
                                  |
I hasten to ...                   |Me apresuro a...
                                  |
We beg to acknowledge             |Tenemos el honor de
receipt of                        |acusarle(s) recibo
your letter of ...                |de su carta de...
                                  |
I regret to...                    |Siento (tener que)...
                                  |
Your favour of the                |Oportunamente nos
15th inst. duly                   |favoreció su grata
reached us.                       |15 de actual.
                                  |
We enclose herewith...            |Adjunto remitimos...
                                  |
Confirming our letter             |Confirmándole(s) nuestra
of the 29th ult....               |carta de
                                  |29 del ppdo....
                                  |
I have just received              |Acabo de recibir su
your letter of the                |carta del 10 corriente.
10th inst.                        |
                                  |
I am exceedingly                  |Agredezco a V. muchísimo...
obliged to you for...             |
                                  |
I was very sorry to               |He sentido mucho saber...
hear...                           |
                                  |
I thank you for your              |Agradezco a V. su
kind letter of...                 |amable carta de...
                                  |
I had the honour of               |Tuve el honor de
writing to you on                 |escribirle a V. el
the 12th ult.                     |12 del mes ppdo.
                                  |
The person who will               |El dador (portador)
hand you this letter              |de la presente es
is Mr. X. who                     |el Sr. X., quien
lives in the same                 |vive en la misma
town as I.                        |ciudad que yo.
                                  |
Dear friend, I cannot             |Amigo mío: No puedo
make out                          |comprender su silencio;
your silence; what                |¿qué ha sido
has become of you?                |de V.?
                                  |
                                  |
_To end a Letter._                |_Concluir una Carta._
                                  |
I am, dear Sir, yours             |Soy de V. atento S.
truly,                            |S.[28] Q.B.S.M.[29]
                                  |
We remain, dear Sirs,             |Quedamos de Vs.
Yours faithfully,                 |atentos S.S. Q.B.S.M.
                                  |
Without further, I remain,        |Sin más, me repito de
Yours truly,                      |V. atto. S.S. etc.
                                  |
Awaiting your reply,              |En espera de su contestación,
I remain, Yours                   |quedo
faithfully,                       |de V. afmo. S.S.
                                  |
Always at your service,           |Siempre a las órdenes
I remain,...                      |de V. me repito
                                  |suyo afmo. S.S.
                                  |
Yours very truly,                 |De V. muy atto. y S.S.
                                  |
Sincerely yours,                  |Suyo afmo. S.S. y amigo
                                  |
Your sincere friend,              |Su amigo que le aprecia
                                  |
Your affectionate son,            |Su hijo que le ama
                                  |
We beg to subscribe               |Tenemos el honor de
ourselves, Gentlemen,             |suscribirnos  de
your                              |Vs. sus más atentos
most obedient                     |y S.S. Q.B.S.M.
servants,                         |
                                  |
                                  |
=English and Spanish Idiomatic    |
Expressions and Proverbs.=        |
                                  |
*       *       *       *       * |
                                  |
Expresiones Idiomáticas y         |
Refranes Ingleses y Españoles.    |
                                  |
*       *       *       *       * |
                                  |
ENGLISH.                          |SPANISH.
                                  |
He was caught in the              |Fué cogido infraganti
very act.                         |(en flagrante delito).
                                  |
Much ado about nothing.           |Mucho ruído y pocas nueces.
                                  |
Without more ado.                 |Sin más ni más.
                                  |
To be on the alert.               |Estar alerta. Estar sobre aviso.
                                  |
After all.                        |Al fin y al cabo.
                                  |
Grasp all, lose all.              |Quien mucho abarca,
                                  |poco aprieta. La
                                  |codicia rompe el
                                  |saco.
                                  |
Once for all.                     |De una vez para siempre.
                                  |
When all comes to all.            |Con todo eso.
                                  |
I have an appointment             |Tengo cita con él.
with him.                         |
                                  |
Make an appointment               |Deme V. hora para
with me.                          |verle.
                                  |
Arm in arm.                       |Del brazo. De bracete.
                                  |
On good authority.                |De buena tinta.
                                  |
Be it as it may.                  |Sea como fuere.
                                  |
As you make your                  |Quien mala cama hace,
bed so you must                   |en ella se yace.
lie on it.                        |
                                  |
Early to bed, and                 |Si quieres buena fama,
early to rise,                    |no te dé el sol en
makes a man                       |la cama.
healthy, wealthy                  |
and wise.                         |
                                  |
The beginning is the              |El primer paso es el
difficulty.                       |que cuesta.
                                  |
Well begun is half                |Obra empezada, medio
done.                             |acabada.
                                  |
He betrayed himself.              |Se vendió.
                                  |
Between you and me.               |Para entre los dos.
                                  |
Birds of a feather                |Dios los cría y ellos
flock together.                   |se juntan.
                                  |
A bird in the hand is             |Más vale pájaro en
worth two in the                  |mano que buitre
bush.                             |volando.
                                  |
To kill two birds with            |Matar dos pájaros de
one stone.                        |un tiro.
                                  |
A little bird told me.            |Me lo ha dicho un pajarito.
                                  |
To come to blows.                 |Venir a las manos.
                                  |
Without striking a                |Sin dar un golpe.
blow.                             |
                                  |
We are in the same                |Nos hallamos en el
boat.                             |mismo trance.
                                  |
To blow out one's                 |Levantarse la tapa de
brains.                           |los sesos.
                                  |
A bone of contention.             |Una manzana de discordia.
                                  |
What is bred in the               |La cabra tira al monte.
bone will never                   |Genio y figura
come out of the                   |hasta la sepultura.
flesh.                            |
                                  |
To bribe someone.                 |Untarle a alguno las manos.
                                  |
New brooms sweep                  |Escoba nueva barre
clean.                            |bien.
                                  |
He does not beat                  |No se anda por las
about the bush.                   |ramas.
                                  |
To put the cart before            |Tomar el rábano por
fore the horse.                   |las hojas.
                                  |
They lead a cat and               |Viven como perros y
dog life.                         |gatos.
                                  |
Changes are pleasant.             |En la variedad está el gusto.
                                  |
Charity begins at                 |La caridad bien ordenada
home.                             |empieza
                                  |por sí (por uno
                                  |propio).
                                  |
A burnt child dreads              |El gato escaldado del
fire.                             |agua fría huye.
                                  |
Spare the rod and                 |Ese te quiere bien
spoil the child.                  |que te hace llorar.
                                  |
He is a chip off the              |De tal palo, tal astilla.
old block.                        |
                                  |
To carry coals to                 |Llevar hierro a Vizcaya.
Newcastle.                        |
                                  |
Cut your coat according           |Cual el año tal el jarro.
to your cloth.                    |
                                  |
It is not the coat that           |El hábito no hace al
makes the man.                    |monje.
                                  |
First  come,  first               |Primer venido, primer
served.                           |servido.
                                  |
Tell me your company,             |Dime con quien andas,
and I will tell                   |y te diré quien
you your character.               |eres.
                                  |
Too many cooks spoil              |Barco que mandan
the broth.                        |muchos pilotos, pronto
                                  |se va a pique.
                                  |
To pluck up courage.              |Hacer de tripas corazón.
                                  |
Much cry and little               |Mucho ruido y pocas
wool.                             |nueces.
                                  |
There is many a slip              |De la mano a la boca,
'twixt the cup                    |se pierde la sopa.
and the lip.                      |
                                  |
To be at daggers drawn.           |Comerse unos a otros.
                                  |
To look daggers.                  |Comerse a uno con la
                                  |vista (con los ojos).
                                  |
The better the day,               |En buen día, buenas
the better the deed.              |obras.
                                  |
None so deaf as those             |No hay peor sordo
who won't hear.                   |que el que no
                                  |quiere oír.
                                  |
To make ducks and drakes          |Derrochar el dinero.
with one's money.                 |
                                  |
To put all one's eggs             |Poner toda la carne
in one basket.                    |en el asador.
                                  |
He is out of his element.         |Está fuera de su centro.
                                  |
They find it very hard            |Encuentran mucha dificultad
to make both                      |en redondear
ends meet.                        |sus rentas.
                                  |
He had a narrow escape.           |De buena se ha librado.
                                  |
Even or odd.                      |Pares o nones.
                                  |
At all events.                    |En todo caso.
                                  |
Coming events cast                |Por las vísperas se
their shadows before.             |conocen los santos.
                                  |
Don't get excited.                |No se altere V. No se sofoque V.
                                  |
Like father, like son.            |De tal padre, tal hijo.
                                  |
Fine feathers make                |Una buena capa todo
fine birds.                       |lo tapa.
                                  |
It makes my flesh                 |Me pone carne de
creep.                            |gallina.
                                  |
To take French leave.             |Despedirse a la francesa.
                                  |
Out of the frying-pan             |Saltar de la sartén y
into the fire.                    |dar en las brasas.
                                  |
She has the gift of               |Ella tiene mucho pico.
the gab.                          |
                                  |
Ill-gotten gain never             |Lo ajeno no hace
prospers.                         |heredero.
                                  |
The game is not                   |Gastamos la pólvora
worth the candle.                 |en salvos.
                                  |
To make game of someone.          |Mofarse de alguno.
                                  |
God helps those who               |A quien madruga, Dios
help themselves.                  |le ayuda.
                                  |
All is not gold that              |No es oro todo lo que
glitters.                         |reluce.
                                  |
To kill the goose that            |Matar la gallina que
lays the golden                   |pone el huevo de
eggs.                             |oro.
                                  |
To bring grist to the             |Llevar el agua a su
mill.                             |molino.
                                  |
Habit is second nature.           |La costumbre es otra
                                  |naturaleza.
                                  |
It makes one's hair               |Le pone a uno los
stand on end.                     |pelos de punta.
                                  |
To go halves.                     |Ir a medias.
                                  |
As if nothing had                 |Como si nada hubiera
happened.                         |pasado. Como si
                                  |tal cosa.
                                  |
To be hard up.                    |Hallarse en apuros.
                                  |
The more haste, the               |Vísteme despacio que
less speed.                       |estoy de prisa.
                                  |
Make hay while the                |Al hierro caliente batir
sun shines.                       |de repente.
                                  |
Head or tail.                     |Cara o cruz.
                                  |
I cannot make head                |Esto no tiene pies ni
or tail of this.                  |cabeza.
                                  |
They are over head                |Están empeñados hasta
and ears in debt.                 |los ojos.
                                  |
Two heads are better              |Más ven cuatro ojos
than one.                         |que dos.
                                  |
You need not take it              |No hay que tomarlo
to heart.                         |a pecho.
                                  |
To take to one's heels.           |Apretar los talones.
                                  |
Honesty is the best               |Peso y medida quitan
policy.                           |al hombre fatiga.
                                  |
Look not a gift horse             |A caballo regalado no
in the mouth.                     |hay que mirarle el
                                  |diente.
                                  |
Spare hours.                      |Horas de recreo (de ocio).
                                  |
A man's house is his              |Mientras en mi casa
castle.                           |estoy, rey soy.
                                  |
Hunger is the best                |La mejor salsa es el
sauce.                            |hambre.
                                  |
There is no hurry.                |No corre prisa.
                                  |
Idleness is the root              |La ociosidad es madre
of all evil.                      |de los vicios.
                                  |
Joking apart.                     |Chanzas aparte.
                                  |
Better late than never.           |Más vale tarde que nunca.
                                  |
He is as thin as a lath.          |Está hecho una espátula.
                                  |
They laugh best who               |Al freír será el reír.
laugh last.                       |Al fin se canta la
                                  |gloria.
                                  |
He is laughing in his             |Se ríe para sí.
sleeve.                           |
                                  |
Lightly come, lightly go          |Los dineros del sacristán,
                                  |cantando se
                                  |vienen y cantando
                                  |se van.
                                  |
Listeners never hear              |Quien escucha, su mal
good of themselves.               |oye.
                                  |
Literally.                        |Al pie de la letra.
                                  |
Every little helps.               |Algo es algo.
                                  |
Many a little makes a             |Muchos pocos hacen
mickle.                           |un mucho.
                                  |
Look before you leap.             |Antes que te cases,
                                  |mira lo que haces.
                                  |
To cast lots.                     |Echar suertes.
                                  |
He has left me in the             |Me ha dejado plantado.
lurch.                            |
                                  |
Man proposes, God                 |El hombre propone y
disposes.                         |Dios dispone.
                                  |
One man's meat is                 |Lo que es bueno para
another man's                     |el hígado es malo
poison.                           |para el bazo.
                                  |
I do not like his manners.        |No me gustan sus modales.
                                  |
He has no manners.                |No tiene crianza.
                                  |
Tell that to the marines.         |A otro perro con ese hueso.
                                  |
To hit the mark.                  |Dar en el blanco.
                                  |
To miss the mark.                 |Errar el blanco.
                                  |
Like master, like man.            |Tal amo, tal criado.
                                  |
As a matter of fact.              |En efecto.
                                  |
It is a matter of taste.          |Es cuestión de gustos.
                                  |
He does not mince matters.        |No se para en repulgos.
                                  |
So many men, so                   |Tantas cabezas, tantas
many minds.                       |sentencias.
                                  |
You are in a nice                 |En buena se ha metido
mess now.                         |V. ahora.
                                  |
They are in a mess.               |Están en un brete.
                                  |
In the very middle.               |Justamente en medio.
                                  |
It is no use crying               |A lo hecho pecho.
over spilt milk.                  |
                                  |
He changed his mind.              |Ha mudado de parecer.
                                  |
I gave him a piece of             |Le he dicho unas
my mind.                          |claridades.
                                  |
To be bent on mischief            |Estar para hacer de las suyas.
                                  |
Spare moments.                    |Ratos de ocio.
                                  |
Money begets money.               |Dinero llama dinero.
                                  |
Money makes the                   |Por dinero baila el
mare to go.                       |perro (y por pan
                                  |si se lo dan).
                                  |
He owes money to                  |Debe hasta el aire que
everybody.                        |respira.
                                  |
To make a mountain                |Hacer de una pulga
out of a molehill.                |un camello (un
                                  |elefante).
                                  |
There is some mystery             |Aquí hay gato encerrado.
here.                             |
                                  |
To hit the nail on the            |Dar en el clavo.
head.                             |
                                  |
Necessity knows no law.           |La necesidad carece de ley.
                                  |
To look for a needle              |Buscar una aguja en
in a bundle of hay.               |un pajar.
                                  |
A sleepless night.                |Una noche toledana.
                                  |
Nothing venture, nothing          |Quien no se aventura,
win.                              |no pasa la mar.
                                  |
They gave him notice.             |Le han despachado.
                                  |
Now or never.                     |Ahora o nunca.
                                  |
He looks after number             |Se ata bien el dedo.
one.                              |
                                  |
As old as the hills.              |Más viejo que el andar a gatas.
                                  |
Opportunity  makes                |La ocasión hace al
the thief.                        |ladrón.
                                  |
Patience works wonders.           |Con paciencia y saliva
                                  |un elefante se tragó
                                  |a una hormiga.
                                  |
To buy a pig in a poke.           |Comprar gato en saco.
                                  |
To be on pins and                 |Estar en ascuas (en
needles.                          |brasas).
                                  |
The pitcher goes so               |Tantas veces va el
often to the well                 |cántaro a la
that it is broken                 |fuente que al fin
at last.                          |se quiebra.
                                  |
Let us return to the              |Volvamos al asunto.
point.                            |
                                  |
The pot calls the                 |Dijo la sartén a la
kettle black.                     |caldera,  quítate
                                  |allá ojinegra.
                                  |
Poverty is no crime.              |Pobreza no es vileza.
                                  |
Practice makes perfect.           |El ejercicio hace maestro.
                                  |
The pros and cons.                |El pro y el contra.
                                  |
There are two sides               |Preciso es oír los dos
to every question.                |cantares.
                                  |
He is quick-tempered.             |Es de genio vivo. Es una pólvora.
                                  |
It never rains but it             |Un mal llama a otro.
pours.                            |
                                  |
Short reckonings                  |Cuentas claras, amigos
make long friends.                |viejos.
                                  |
Without rhyme or reason.          |Sin ton ni son.
                                  |
Right or wrong.                   |Con razón o sin ella.
                                  |
It served him right.              |Ha llevado su merecido.
                                  |
Rome was not built                |No se ganó Zamora
in a day.                         |en una hora.
                                  |
To rough it.                      |Pasar trabajos.
                                  |
To run away.                      |Tomar soleta. Apretar los talones.
                                  |
It is not worth a rush.           |No vale un ardite.
                                  |
Safe and sound.                   |Sano y salvo.
                                  |
Everyone knows                    |Cada uno sabe donde
where the shoe                    |le aprieta el zapato.
pinches.                          |
                                  |
Out of sight, out of              |A espaldas vueltas,
mind.                             |memorias muertas.
                                  |
Silence gives consent.            |Quien calla otorga.
                                  |
He saved his skin.                |Sacó a salvo la piel.
                                  |
To sleep over it.                 |Consultar con la almohada.
                                  |
No song, no supper.               |No hay dinero, no hay pandero.
                                  |
Sooner or later.                  |Tarde o temprano.
                                  |
To call a spade a spade.          |Llamar al pan, pan, y al vino, vino.
                                  |
To keep step.                     |Andar a compás.
                                  |
A stitch in time saves            |Lo hecho a tiempo
nine.                             |vale un ciento.
                                  |
Store is no sore.                 |Lo que abunda no daña.
                                  |
He does not care a                |No se da un ardite de
straw about it.                   |ello.
                                  |
Little strokes fell               |Poco a poco hila la
great oaks.                       |vieja el copo.
                                  |
He is in a brown study.           |Está en Babia.
                                  |
Better to be sure than            |Más vale un por si
sorry.                            |acaso que un
                                  |quien pensara.
                                  |
One swallow does not              |Una golondrina no
make a summer.                    |hace verano.
                                  |
He is a swell.                    |Es un elegante.
                                  |
There is no accounting            |Contra gustos no hay
for tastes.                       |disputa.
                                  |
He will never set the             |No ha inventado la
Thames on fire.                   |pólvora.
                                  |
On second thoughts.               |Después de repensarlo.
                                  |Reflexión
                                  |hecha.
                                  |
I am tired of it.                 |Eso me aburre.
                                  |
To give tit for tat.              |Amor con amor se
                                  |paga. Donde las
                                  |dan las toman.
                                  |
A slip of the tongue.             |Un desliz de la lengua.
                                  |
To sleep like a top.              |Dormir como un tronco.
                                  |
One good turn deserves            |Una mano lava la
another.                          |otra (y las dos la
                                  |cara).
                                  |
Up-to-date.                       |Al día.
                                  |
To make a virtue of               |Hacer de la necesidad
necessity.                        |virtud.
                                  |
To have a voice in the            |Tener voz en capítulo.
matter.                           |
                                  |
Everything comes to               |Con paciencia se gana
him who waits.                    |el cielo.
                                  |
To fish in troubled               |Pescar en río revuelto.
waters.                           |
                                  |
Still waters run deep.            |Del agua mansa me
                                  |libre Dios, que de
                                  |la brava me guardaré
                                  |yo.
                                  |
On the way.                       |De camino.
                                  |
She does not know                 |Ella no sabe a dónde
which way to                      |volver la cabeza.
turn.                             |
                                  |
Ill weeds grow apace.             |La mala yerba siempre crece.
                                  |
All's well that ends              |El fin corona la obra.
well.                             |
                                  |
They are well off.                |Tienen un buen pasar.
                                  |
It's an ill wind that             |No hay mal que por
blows nobody                      |bien no venga.
good.                             |
                                  |
Good wine needs no                |El buen paño en el
bush.                             |arca se vende.
                                  |
A word to the wise                |Al buen entendedor
is sufficient.                    |pocas palabras
                                  |bastan.
                                  |
He is at his wits' end.           |No sabe qué decir
                                  |(ni qué hacer). Se
                                  |halla en un abismo.




Vocabulary of Business Words and Expressions in Everyday Use.

Vocabulario de Términos y Expresiones Comerciales de Uso Diario.


ENGLISH.                        |SPANISH.
                                |
Abandonment.                    |Abandono.
                                |
Abatement.                      |Rebaja.
                                |
Abeyance, in.                   |En suspenso.
                                |
Above mentioned.                |Antedicho, susodicho.
                                |
Abstract of account.            |Extracto de cuenta.
                                |
Accelerated train.              |Tren acelerado, rápido.
                                |
Acceptance of goods.            |Aceptación de mercancías.
                                |
Accommodation bill.             |Letra de cortesía, de deferencia.
                                |
Account.                        |Cuenta.
                                |
Account current.                |Cuenta corriente.
                                |
Account sales.                  |Cuenta de venta.
                                |
Accountant.                     |Contador.
                                |
Accumulation of goods.          |Acumulación de mercancías.
                                |
Acknowledgment of receipt.      |Acuse de recibo.
                                |
Act of God.                     |Fuerza mayor.
                                |
Action.                         |Acción, pleito, proceso.
                                |
Additional freight.             |Flete adicional.
                                |
Address.                        |Dirección, señas.
                                |
Addressee.                      |Destinatario.
                                |
Addressor.                      |Remitente.
                                |
Administration.                 |Administración.
                                |
Advance.                        |Avance, anticipo; alza, subida.
                                |
Advertisement.                  |Anuncio.
                                |
Advice.                         |Aviso; consejo.
                                |
Advice note.                    |Carta de aviso.
                                |
Affidavit.                      |Atestación.
                                |
Agency.                         |Agencia.
                                |
Agent.                          |Agente.
                                |
Agreement.                      |Convenio, contrato.
                                |
Allotment.                      |Repartición.
                                |
Allowance for tare.             |Rebaja por tara.
                                |
Amalgamation.                   |Amalgamación, fusión.
                                |
Ambulance carriage.             |Coche de ambulancia.
                                |
Ambulance train.                |Tren de ambulancia.
                                |
Amount of property.             |Total de los bienes.
                                |
Anchorage.                      |Anclaje, fondeadero.
                                |
Announcement.                   |Anuncio.
                                |
Annual account.                 |Cuenta anual.
                                |
Annual balance.                 |Balance anual.
                                |
Answer.                         |Respuesta, contestación.
                                |
Appeal.                         |Apelación.
                                |
Application.                    |Demanda, solicitud.
                                |
Appointment.                    |Cita; nombramiento.
                                |
Appraisement.                   |Tasación.
                                |
Appraiser.                      |Tasador.
                                |
Apprentice.                     |Aprendiz.
                                |
Apprentice's indenture.         |Contrato de aprendizaje.
                                |
Apprenticeship.                 |Aprendizaje.
                                |
Approval.                       |Aprobación.
                                |
Appurtenances.                  |Accesorios.
                                |
Arbitration.                    |Arbitraje.
                                |
Arbitrator.                     |Arbitro.
                                |
Arrangement.                    |Arreglo.
                                |
Arrears.                        |Atrasos.
                                |
Arrival.                        |Llegada.
                                |
Arrival platform.               |Andén de llegada.
                                |
Article.                        |Artículo.
                                |
Ascent.                         |Subida, ascensión.
                                |
Ascent (slope).                 |Cuesta, pendiente.
                                |
Assets.                         |Activo.
                                |
Assignee.                       |Cesionario.
                                |
Assigner.                       |Cedente.
                                |
Assignment.                     |Cesión.
                                |
Association.                    |Asociación.
                                |
Assortment.                     |Surtido.
                                |
Astray, to go.                  |Extraviarse.
                                |
At par.                         |Al par.
                                |
At sight.                       |A la vista.
                                |
Attention.                      |Atención.
                                |
Auction.                        |Subasta.
                                |
Auctioneer.                     |Rematador.
                                |
Auditor.                        |Auditor, revisor.
                                |
Authority.                      |Autoridad; autorización.
                                |
Average number.                 |Número medio.
                                |
Average price.                  |Precio medio.
                                |
Average sum.                    |Suma media.
                                |
Average value.                  |Valor medio.
                                |
Award.                          |Laudo.
                                |
                                |
Backwardation.                  |Deporte.
                                |
Bag.                            |Saco.
                                |
Baggage (luggage).              |Equipaje.
                                |
Bail.                           |Caución, fianza.
                                |
Balance.                        |Balance, saldo.
                                |
Balance sheet.                  |Balance.
                                |
Bale.                           |Fardo.
                                |
Ballast.                        |Lastre.
                                |
Bank.                           |Banco.
                                |
Banker.                         |Banquero.
                                |
Banking.                        |Banca.
                                |
Banking business.               |Negocios bancarios.
                                |
Banking expenses.               |Gastos de banca.
                                |
Banknote.                       |Billete de banco.
                                |
Bankrupt.                       |Fallido, quebrado.
                                |
Bankrupt's certificate.         |Concordato.
                                |
Bankrupt's estate.              |Masa.
                                |
Bankruptcy.                     |Quiebra, bancarrota.
                                |
Bar (gold or silver).           |Barra (de oro o de plata).
                                |
Bargain.                        |Ganga.
                                |
Barratry.                       |Baratería.
                                |
Barrel.                         |Barril.
                                |
Barter (exchange).              |Trueque.
                                |
Basin (dock).                   |Dársena, dique.
                                |
Basin (port).                   |Fondeadero.
                                |
Bay.                            |Bahía.
                                |
Beacon.                         |Faro, fanal.
                                |
Bear.                           |Bajista.
                                |
Bearer.                         |Portador.
                                |
Berth.                          |Litera; sitio; empleo.
                                |
Between deck (steerage).        |Entrepuente.
                                |
Bid.                            |Oferta, puja.
                                |
Bidder, highest.                |Mejor postor.
                                |
Bill.                           |Letra; cuenta.
                                |
Bill book.                      |Libro de letras.
                                |
Bill broker.                    |Corredor de cambios.
                                |
Bill holder.                    |Portador de una letra.
                                |
Bill of exchange.               |Letra de cambio.
                                |
Bill of health.                 |Patente de sanidad.
                                |
Bill of lading.                 |Conocimiento.
                                |
Bill of sale.                   |Carta de venta.
                                |
Bill stamp.                     |Sello de letras.
                                |
Blank endorsement.              |Endoso en blanco.
                                |
Board of administration.        |Consejo de administración.
                                |
Boatman.                        |Botero.
                                |
Boatswain.                      |Contramaestre.
                                |
Boiler.                         |Caldera.
                                |
Bond.                           |Bono; obligación; fianza.
                                |
Bonded goods.                   |Mercancías en depósito.
                                |
Bondholder.                     |Bonista, obligacionista.
                                |
Bonus.                          |Prima.
                                |
Book debt.                      |Deuda activa.
                                |
Book-keeper.                    |Tenedor de libros.
                                |
Book-keeping.                   |Teneduría de libros.
                                |
Boom.                           |Alza; actividad.
                                |
Bottomry bond.                  |Contrato a la gruesa.
                                |
Bowsprit.                       |Bauprés.
                                |
Box.                            |Cajita.
                                |
Brake.                          |Freno.
                                |
Branch.                         |Sucursal.
                                |
Branch line (railway).          |Ramal; vía secundaria.
                                |
Breach of contract.             |Infracción de contrato.
                                |
Breakage.                       |Rotura.
                                |
Brig.                           |Bergantín.
                                |
Broad gauge.                    |Vía ancha.
                                |
Broadside.                      |Andanada.
                                |
Broker (goods).                 |Corredor (de comercio).
                                |
Brokerage.                      |Corretaje.
                                |
Buffer.                         |Tope.
                                |
Bull.                           |Alcista.
                                |
Bullion.                        |Metálico, numerario.
                                |
Bundle.                         |Atado, lío.
                                |
Buoy.                           |Boya.
                                |
Business connections.           |Relaciones comerciales.
                                |
Business expenses.              |Gastos de comercio.
                                |
Business for own account.       |Negocios de cuenta propia.
                                |
Buyer.                          |Comprador.
                                |
                                |
Cabin.                          |Cámara.
                                |
Cable.                          |Cable.
                                |
Cablegram.                      |Cablegrama.
                                |
Calculation.                    |Cálculo.
                                |
Calculation of freight.         |Cálculo del flete.
                                |
Calking.                        |Calafateo.
                                |
Call.                           |Llamada; (port) escala.
                                |
Cancelling.                     |Anulación,  cancelación.
                                |
Capital.                        |Capital.
                                |
Capitalist.                     |Capitalista.
                                |
Captain.                        |Capitán.
                                |
Cargo.                          |Carga.
                                |
Carriage.                       |Porte.
                                |
Carrier (carter).               |Carretero.
                                |
Cartage.                        |Acarreo, carretaje, camionaje.
                                |
Case.                           |Caja.
                                |
Case, skeleton.                 |Caja-jaula.
                                |
Cash.                           |Dinero contante; al contado.
                                |
Cash account.                   |Cuenta de caja.
                                |
Cash balance.                   |Dinero en caja.
                                |
Cash book.                      |Libro de caja.
                                |
Cash box.                       |Caja.
                                |
Cash office.                    |Caja.
                                |
Cashier.                        |Cajero.
                                |
Cask.                           |Casco.
                                |
Catalogue.                      |Catálogo.
                                |
Cattle truck.                   |Vagón para ganado.
                                |
Caution.                        |Advertencia.
                                |
Cereals.                        |Cereales.
                                |
Certificate.                    |Certificado.
                                |
Cession.                        |Cesión.
                                |
Chairman.                       |Presidente.
                                |
Chamber of Commerce.            |Cámara de Comercio.
                                |
Change of carriages.            |Cambio de coches.
                                |
Charges for collecting.         |Gastos de cobro.
                                |
Charges for reloading.          |Gastos de reembarque.
                                |
Charter party.                  |Póliza de fletamento.
                                |
Chemicals.                      |Productos químicos.
                                |
Cheque.                         |Cheque.
                                |
Cheque book.                    |Libro de cheques; talonario.
                                |
Chief custom-house.             |Aduana principal.
                                |
Chief office.                   |Oficina principal, casa matriz.
                                |
Chief station.                  |Estación principal.
                                |
Choice goods.                   |Géneros escogidos.
                                |
Circular letter.                |Carta circular.
                                |
Circular note.                  |Nota circular.
                                |
Circular railway.               |Ferrocarril de circunvalación.
                                |
Circulation.                    |Circulación.
                                |
Claim.                          |Reclamación.
                                |
Claim (debt).                   |Crédito.
                                |
Clause.                         |Cláusula.
                                |
Clear, to.                      |Despachar.
                                |
Clerk.                          |Dependiente.
                                |
Client.                         |Cliente.
                                |
Coaster (vessel).               |Buque de cabotaje, vapor costero.
                                |
Collecting station.             |Estación central.
                                |
Collection (of drafts).         |Cobro.
                                |
Collector of customs.           |Recaudador de aduanas.
                                |
Colonial trade.                 |Comercio colonial.
                                |
Commerce.                       |Comercio.
                                |
Commercial affairs.             |Asuntos comerciales.
                                |
Commercial agent.               |Agente comercial.
                                |
Commercial house.               |Casa de comercio.
                                |
Commercial intercourse.         |Relaciones comerciales.
                                |
Commercial law.                 |Derecho comercial.
                                |
Commercial school.              |Escuela de comercio.
                                |
Commercial style.               |Estilo comercial.
                                |
Commercial traveller.           |Viajante comercial.
                                |
Commercial treaty.              |Tratado de comercio.
                                |
Commission.                     |Comisión.
                                |
Commission agent.               |Comisionista.
                                |
Commission business.            |Negocios de comisión.
                                |
Commission merchant.            |Comisionista.
                                |
Committee.                      |Comité.
                                |
Company.                        |Compañía.
                                |
Compartment for non-smokers.    |Departamento para no fumadores.
                                |
Compensation.                   |Bonificación, indemnización.
                                |
Competent judge.                |Juez competente.
                                |
Competition.                    |Competencia, concurrencia.
                                |
Competitor.                     |Competidor, concurrente.
                                |
Complaint book.                 |Libro de quejas.
                                |
Composition.                    |Arreglo, acuerdo.
                                |
Compound interest.              |Interés compuesto.
                                |
Compromise.                     |Compromiso.
                                |
Compulsory prepayment           |Pago adelantado obligatorio
of freight.                     |del flete.
                                |
Concern.                        |Asunto.
                                |
Concession.                     |Concesión.
                                |
Condition.                      |Condición, estado.
                                |
Condition of forwarding.        |Condición de expedición.
                                |
Conditionally.                  |Condicionalmente.
                                |
Conductor (of a train).         |Conductor.
                                |
Confirmation.                   |Confirmación.
                                |
Confiscation.                   |Confiscación, comiso.
                                |
Conformably to tariff.          |Con arreglo a la tarifa.
                                |
Connecting line.                |Linea de empalme.
                                |
Connection.                     |Relación; clientela; combinación.
                                |
Consignee.                      |Consignatario.
                                |
Consignment.                    |Consignación, envío.
                                |
Consignment against             |Consignación contra
cash on delivery.               |pago a la entrega.
                                |
Consignment of piece            |Consignación de géneros
goods.                          |en pieza.
                                |
Consignment prepaid.            |Consignación porte pagado.
                                |
Consignor.                      |Expedidor, remitente.
                                |
Consols.                        |Consolidados.
                                |
Consul.                         |Cónsul.
                                |
Consular agent.                 |Agente consular.
                                |
Consular invoice.               |Factura consular.
                                |
Consulate.                      |Consulado.
                                |
Consumer.                       |Consumidor.
                                |
Contango.                       |Reporte.
                                |
Contents unknown.               |Se ignora el contenido.
                                |
Contract for delivery.          |Contrato de entrega.
                                |
Contracting parties.            |Partes contratantes.
                                |
Contractor.                     |Contratante.
                                |
Convenience.                    |Conveniencia, comodidad.
                                |
Convention.                     |Convención.
                                |
Conversion.                     |Conversión.
                                |
Conveyance.                     |Transporte, camionaje; vehículo.
                                |
Cooperage.                      |Tonelería.
                                |
Copy (of a book).               |Ejemplar.
                                |
Copy (of a letter).             |Copia.
                                |
Copying book.                   |Copiador.
                                |
Copyright.                      |Propiedad literaria.
                                |
Correspondence.                 |Correspondencia.
                                |
Correspondent.                  |Corresponsal.
                                |
Cost price.                     |Precio de coste.
                                |
Cotton mill.                    |Fábrica de algodón.
                                |
Counsel.                        |Abogado.
                                |
Counter.                        |Mostrador.
                                |
Countercharge.                  |Recriminación.
                                |
Counterfoil.                    |Talón.
                                |
Countermand.                    |Contraorden.
                                |
Counteroffer.                   |Contraoferta.
                                |
Countersignature.               |Refrendata.
                                |
Counter-weight.                 |Contrapeso.
                                |
Counting house.                 |Oficina, escritorio.
                                |
Coupon.                         |Cupón.
                                |
Court of Admiralty.             |Comandancia de Marina.
                                |
Covered platform.               |Plataforma cubierta;
(railway) andén                 |
cubierto.                       |
                                |
Cranage.                        |Derechos de grúa.
                                |
Crane.                          |Grúa.
                                |
Crate.                          |Huacal.
                                |
Credit.                         |Crédito.
                                |
Credit note.                    |Nota de crédito.
                                |
Creditor.                       |Acreedor.
                                |
Crew.                           |Tripulación.
                                |
Crisis.                         |Crisis.
                                |
Crossing.                       |Travesía.
                                |
Cruise.                         |Viaje por mar.
                                |
Cruiser.                        |Crucero.
                                |
Cubic contents.                 |Contenido cúbico.
                                |
Cubic measure.                  |Medida cúbica.
                                |
Currency.                       |Circulación.
                                |
Current money.                  |Moneda corriente.
                                |
Curve.                          |Curva.
                                |
Custom.                         |Costumbre.
                                |
Custom-house.                   |Aduana.
                                |
Custom-house duty.              |Derechos de aduana.
                                |
Custom-house officer.           |Aduanero.
                                |
Customs warehouse.              |Depósito de la aduana.
                                |
Customer.                       |Cliente, parroquiano.
                                |
Cutter.                         |Cúter.
                                |
                                |
Damage.                         |Avería.
                                |
Damaged by sea water.           |Averiado por agua de mar.
                                |
Damages.                        |Daños y perjuicios; indemnización.
                                |
Danger signal.                  |Señal de peligro.
                                |
Date.                           |Fecha.
                                |
Day-book.                       |Diario.
                                |
Day of delivery.                |Día de entrega.
                                |
Days of demurrage.              |Días de estadía.
                                |
Days of grace.                  |Días de cortesía.
                                |
Dealer.                         |Comerciante, negociante, tratante.
                                |
Debenture.                      |Obligación, vale.
                                |
Debit.                          |Débito.
                                |
Debit note.                     |Nota de débito.
                                |
Debt.                           |Deuda.
                                |
Debt of honour.                 |Deuda de honor.
                                |
Debtor.                         |Deudor.
                                |
Deck.                           |Cubierta.
                                |
Declaration.                    |Declaración.
                                |
Declaration of value.           |Declaración del valor.
                                |
Declaration of weight.          |Declaración del peso.
                                |
Declared value.                 |Valor declarado.
                                |
Decline.                        |Baja.
                                |
Deduction.                      |Deducción, rebaja.
                                |
Deed.                           |Escritura.
                                |
Defaulter.                      |Insolvente.
                                |
Defendant.                      |Demandado.
                                |
Deficiency in weight.           |Falta de peso.
                                |
Deficit.                        |Déficit.
                                |
Degree of latitude.             |Grado de latitud.
                                |
Degree of longitude.            |Grado de longitud.
                                |
Delay of a train.               |Demora de un tren.
                                |
Delivery of goods.              |Entrega de mercancías.
                                |
Delivery of luggage.            |Entrega de equipaje.
                                |
Delivery order.                 |Orden de entrega.
                                |
Demand.                         |Demanda.
                                |
Demurrage.                      |Demora, estadía.
                                |
Dented wheel.                   |Rueda dentada.
                                |
Department.                     |Departamento; ramo.
                                |
Departure of a train.           |Salida de un tren.
                                |
Departure platform.             |Andén de salida.
                                |
Deposit.                        |Depósito.
                                |
Depositing of luggage.          |Depósito (consignación) de equipajes.
                                |
Depot.                          |Depósito.
                                |
Depreciation.                   |Depreciación.
                                |
Depression.                     |Abatimiento.
                                |
Derailment.                     |Descarrilamiento.
                                |
Desk.                           |Bufete, escritorio, pupitre.
                                |
Despatch.                       |Despacho.
                                |
Destination.                    |Destino.
                                |
Details.                        |Detalles.
                                |
Deterioration.                  |Deterioro.
                                |
Development.                    |Desarrollo.
                                |
Differential duty.              |Derecho diferencial.
                                |
Dimension.                      |Dimensión, medida, tamaño.
                                |
Diminution.                     |Diminución.
                                |
Direct  communication.          |Comunicación directa.
                                |
Direction.                      |Dirección.
                                |
Director.                       |Director.
                                |
Directory.                      |Directorio, anuario.
                                |
Disaster.                       |Desastre, siniestro.
                                |
Disbursement.                   |Desembolso.
                                |
Discharging.                    |Descarga.
                                |
Discharging expenses.           |Gastos de descarga.
                                |
Discount.                       |Descuento.
                                |
Discount bank.                  |Banco de descuento.
                                |
Disorder.                       |Desorden.
                                |
Disposition.                    |Disposición.
                                |
Dividend.                       |Dividendo.
                                |
Dock.                           |Dique.
                                |
Document.                       |Documento.
                                |
Domiciled bill.                 |Letra domiciliada.
                                |
Double track.                   |Doble vía.
                                |
Down the river.                 |Río abajo.
                                |
Draft.                          |Letra; (of a vessel) calado.
                                |
Drawback.                       |Devolución de derechos.
                                |
Drawee.                         |Librado.
                                |
Drawer.                         |Librador.
                                |
Drum.                           |Tambor.
                                |
Dry dock.                       |Dique seco.
                                |
Dry goods.                      |Géneros finos.
                                |
Dues.                           |Derechos.
                                |
Duplicate.                      |Duplicado.
                                |
Duty.                           |Derechos, impuesto.
                                |
Duty free.                      |Libre de derechos.
                                |

                               |
Emission.                       |Emisión.
                                |
Emission of bank notes.         |Emisión de billetes de banco.
                                |
Employment.                     |Empleo.
                                |
Enclosed.                       |Adjunto, incluso.
                                |
Enclosure.                      |Inclusa.
                                |
Endeavours.                     |Esfuerzos.
                                |
Endorsement.                    |Endoso.
                                |
Engine.                         |Máquina.
                                |
Engineer.                       |Ingeniero; maquinista.
                                |
Engineering establishment.      |Fábrica de máquinas.
                                |
Enjoyment of interest.          |Usufructo de los intereses.
                                |
Enquiry office.                 |Oficina de informes.
                                |
Enterprise.                     |Empresa.
                                |
Entrance duty.                  |Derecho de entrada.
                                |
Entry at the custom-house.      |Declaración de aduana.
                                |
Equipment.                      |Equipo.
                                |
Error.                          |Error.
                                |
Establishment.                  |Establecimiento, casa.
                                |
Esteem.                         |Estimación, estima.
                                |
Estimate.                       |Cómputo, presupuesto.
                                |
Examination.                    |Examen.
                                |
Exchange.                       |Cambio; bolsa.
                                |
Exchange office.                |Casa de cambio.
                                |
Exchequer bills.                |Vales de la tesorería.
                                |
Excise.                         |Sisa.
                                |
Execution.                      |Ejecución.
                                |
Exemption.                      |Exención, franquicia.
                                |
Exhibition.                     |Exposición.
                                |
Exhibitor.                      |Expositor.
                                |
Expectation.                    |Expectativa.
                                |
Expense.                        |Gasto.
                                |
Experiment.                     |Ensayo, tentativa.
                                |
Expert.                         |Perito.
                                |
Expiration of term.             |Expiración, vencimiento del plazo.
                                |
Expiration of ticket.           |Terminación del billete.
                                |
Expiration of time of           |Vencimiento del plazo
delivery.                       |para la entrega.
                                |
Export duty.                    |Derechos de exportación.
                                |
Export goods.                   |Géneros de exportación.
                                |
Export trade.                   |Comercio de exportación.
                                |
Exporter.                       |Exportador.
                                |
Expostulatory letter.           |Carta de queja.
                                |
Express train.                  |Tren expreso.
                                |
Extract of account.             |Extracto de cuenta.
                                |
Factor.                         |Factor, agente, comisionista.
                                |
Factory price.                  |Precio de fábrica.
                                |
Failure.                        |Quiebra.
                                |
Fall.                           |Baja.
                                |
Falsification of documents.     |Falsificación de documentos.
                                |
Fancy articles, fancy goods.    |Artículos de capricho (de fantasía).
                                |
Fancy goods shop.               |Almacén de efectos de
capricho (de fantasía).         |
                                |
Fashionable.                    |De moda.
                                |
Fast train.                     |Tren rápido, acelerado.
                                |
Fee.                            |Honorario.
                                |
Final balance.                  |Balance final.
                                |
Fine.                           |Multa.
                                |
Finish.                         |Acabado.
                                |
Fire insurance.                 |Seguro contra incendios.
                                |
Firm.                           |Casa.
                                |
Fixed price.                    |Precio fijo.
                                |
Flag.                           |Bandera.
                                |
Floating debt.                  |Deuda flotante.
                                |
Flotsam.                        |Objetos flotantes.
                                |
Flotsam rights.                 |Derechos litorales.
                                |
Fluctuation.                    |Fluctuación.
                                |
Foot-board.                     |Estribo, marchapié.
                                |
Forced (compulsory) loan.       |Empréstito forzoso.
                                |
Foreign securities.             |Valores extranjeros.
                                |
Foremast.                       |Palo de trinquete.
                                |
Forgery.                        |Falsificación.
                                |
Form.                           |Formulario, modelo.
                                |
Forwarding.                     |Expedición.
                                |
Forwarding agent.               |Expedidor.
                                |
Forwarding business.            |Comercio de expedición.
                                |
Forwarding of luggage.          |Expedición del equipaje.
                                |
Fraud.                          |Fraude.
                                |
Fraudulent declaration.         |Declaración fraudulenta.
                                |
Free luggage.                   |Equipaje libre, gratis.
                                |
Free passage.                   |Pasaje gratuito.
                                |
Free port.                      |Puerto libre, franco.
                                |
Free trade.                     |Libre cambio.
                                |
Freight.                        |Flete.
                                |
Freight list.                   |Sobordo.
                                |
Freighter.                      |Fletador.
                                |
Frigate.                        |Fragata.
                                |
Full power of attorney.         |Poder general.
                                |
Fund.                           |Fondo.
                                |
Gain.                           |Ganancia.
                                |
Gauge, to.                      |Medir, arquear.
                                |
Gauger's fee.                   |Medición, arqueaje.
                                |
Gold standard.                  |Ley del oro.
                                |
Goods station.                  |Estación de mercancías.
                                |
Goods tariff.                   |Tarifa de mercancías.
                                |
Goods train.                    |Tren de mercancías.
                                |
Goods traffic.                  |Tráfico de mercancías.
                                |
Goods truck.                    |Vagón de mercancías.
                                |
Goodwill.                       |Clientela, parroquia.
                                |
Government.                     |Gobierno.
                                |
Gratuity.                       |Gratificación.
                                |
Grease.                         |Grasa.
                                |
Grocer.                         |Especiero.
                                |
Gross weight.                   |Peso bruto.
                                |
Guarantee.                      |Garantía, fianza.
                                |
Guarantor.                      |Garante, fiador.
                                |
Guard.                          |Guardia; conductor.
                                |
Guard ship.                     |Buque de guardia.
                                |
Guidance, for your.             |Para su gobierno.
                                |
Harbour.                        |Puerto.
                                |
Hardware.                       |Quincallería.
                                |
Hawker.                         |Buhonero; vendedor ambulante.
                                |
Head office.                    |Oficina principal, casa matriz.
                                |
Head storekeeper.               |Jefe del almacén.
                                |
Heavy goods.                    |Mercancías pesadas (de peso).
                                |
Heavy sea.                      |Mar gruesa.
                                |
Helm.                           |Timón.
                                |
Helmsman.                       |Timonel.
                                |
High pressure.                  |Alta presión.
                                |
High road.                      |Camino real.
                                |
High sea.                       |Alta mar.
                                |
Highest rate.                   |Tipo más alto.
                                |
Hogshead.                       |Bocoy.
                                |
Hold (of a ship).               |Bodega.
                                |
Holder.                         |Portador.
                                |
Holiday.                        |Día de fiesta.
                                |
Home market.                    |Mercado interior.
                                |
Hoop.                           |Fleje; aro, cerco.
                                |
Horse-power.                    |Fuerza de caballos.
                                |
Hot air heating.                |Calefacción de aire.
                                |
House.                          |Casa.
                                |
Hull (of a ship).               |Casco.
                                |
Immovables.                     |Bienes raíces.
                                |
Import duty.                    |Derechos de importación.
                                |
Import goods.                   |Géneros de importación.
                                |
Import trade.                   |Comercio de importación.
                                |
Importer.                       |Importador.
                                |
Improvement.                    |Mejora.
                                |
Inadvertence.                   |Inadvertencia.
                                |
Inclined plane.                 |Plano inclinado.
                                |
Income tax.                     |Impuesto sobre la renta.
                                |
Increase.                       |Aumento.
                                |
Increased freight.              |Flete aumentado.
                                |
Indemnification.                |Indemnización.
                                |
Indemnity.                      |Indemnidad.
                                |
Indictment.                     |Denuncia.
                                |
Industrial exhibition.          |Exposición industrial.
                                |
Industry.                       |Industria.
                                |
Inflammable goods.              |Mercancías inflamables.
                                |
Information.                    |Informe.
                                |
Infringement.                   |Infracción.
                                |
Insolvency.                     |Insolvencia.
                                |
Instalments.                    |Plazos.
                                |
Instant.                        |Actual, corriente.
                                |
Insurance.                      |Seguro.
                                |
Interest.                       |Interés.
                                |
Interest coupon.                |Cupón de interés.
                                |
Interested parties.             |Interesados, partes interesadas.
                                |
Intermediate station.           |Estación intermedia (intermediaria).
                                |
Interruption of traffic.        |Interrupción del tráfico.
                                |
Intervention.                   |Intervención.
                                |
Interview.                      |Entrevista.
                                |
Introduction.                   |Introducción.
                                |
Invention.                      |Invención.
                                |
Inventor.                       |Inventor.
                                |
Inventory.                      |Inventario.
                                |
Investigation.                  |Investigación.
                                |
Investment.                     |Colocación, empleo.
                                |
Invoice book.                   |Libro de facturas.
                                |
Issue.                          |Emisión.
                                |
Item.                           |Artículo, asiento, partida.
                                |
Jetsam.                         |Echazón.
                                |
Joint account.                  |Cuenta en participación.
                                |
Joint enterprise.               |Empresa en participación.
                                |
Joint manager.                  |Cogerente.
                                |
Joint proprietor.               |Copropietario.
                                |
Joint stock company.            |Sociedad por acciones.
                                |
Journal.                        |Diario.
                                |
Journey.                        |Viaje.
                                |
Judgment.                       |Juicio.
                                |
Junction.                       |Empalme.
                                |
Junction railway.               |Ramal.
                                |
Jury.                           |Jurado.
                                |
Jury mast.                      |Bandola.
                                |
Keel.                           |Quilla.
                                |
Kilogramme.                     |Kilogramo.
                                |
Kilometre.                      |Kilómetro.
                                |
Knowledge.                      |Conocimiento.
                                |
Label.                          |Etiqueta, rótulo.
                                |
Labour.                         |Trabajo.
                                |
Lading.                         |Embarque.
                                |
Land tax.                       |Contribución territorial.
                                |
Landed proprietor.              |Propietario territorial.
                                |
Landing place.                  |Desembarcadero.
                                |
Launch.                         |Lancha; botadura.
                                |
Law.                            |Ley.
                                |
Lawsuit.                        |Causa, pleito.
                                |
Lawyer.                         |Abogado.
                                |
Lay-day.                        |Día de estadía.
                                |
Layer.                          |Capa.
                                |
Lead covering.                  |Emplomaje.
                                |
Leakage.                        |Derrame, merma.
                                |
Lease.                          |Contrato de arriendo.
                                |
Leaseholder.                    |Arrendatario.
                                |
Ledger.                         |Libro mayor.
                                |
Legacy.                         |Legado.
                                |
Legal aid.                      |Amparo judicial.
                                |
Legal means.                    |Medios legales.
                                |
Legalisation.                   |Legalización.
                                |
Lender.                         |Prestador.
                                |
Letter.                         |Carta.
                                |
Letter of advice.               |Carta de aviso.
                                |
Letter of credit.               |Carta de crédito.
                                |
Letter of marque.               |Patente de corso.
                                |
Lever.                          |Palanca.
                                |
Liabilities.                    |Pasivo.
                                |
Liability.                      |Responsabilidad.
                                |
License.                        |Licencia, permiso.
                                |
Life annuity.                   |Renta vitalicia.
                                |
Light goods.                    |Mercancías ligeras (de medida).
                                |
Light weight.                   |Peso ligero.
                                |
Light-ship.                     |Buque fanal.
                                |
Lighter.                        |Lancha, gabarra.
                                |
Lighterage.                     |Gabarraje.
                                |
Lighthouse.                     |Faro, fanal.
                                |
Limited company.                |Sociedad anónima.
                                |
Liquidation.                    |Liquidación.
                                |
Liquidator.                     |Liquidador, síndico.
                                |
Load.                           |Carga.
                                |
Loan.                           |Empréstito.
                                |
Local bill.                     |Letra sobre la plaza.
                                |
Local business.                 |Transacciones de la plaza.
                                |
Local custom.                   |Costumbre local (de la plaza).
                                |
Local expenses.                 |Gastos de plaza.
                                |
Local price.                    |Precio de la plaza (del lugar).
                                |
Local railway.                  |Ferrocarril local.
                                |
Local trade.                    |Comercio local.
                                |
Loss of interest.               |Pérdida de interés.
                                |
Loss on exchange.               |Pérdida en el cambio.
                                |
Low pressure.                   |Baja presión.
                                |
Lowest freight.                 |Flete más bajo.
                                |
Luggage.                        |Equipaje.
                                |
Luggage freight.                |Flete del equipaje.
                                |
Luggage office.                 |Despacho del equipaje.
                                |
Luggage ticket.                 |Talón de equipaje.
                                |
Luggage wagon.                  |Furgón de equipajes.
                                |
                                |
Mail.                           |Correo.
                                |
Maintenance.                    |Manutención.
                                |
Maker.                          |Fabricante.
                                |
Man-of-war.                     |Buque de guerra.
                                |
Management.                     |Dirección, gerencia.
                                |
Manager.                        |Director, gerente.
                                |
Manifest.                       |Manifiesto.
                                |
Manufactory.                    |Fábrica.
                                |
Manufacture.                    |Manufactura, fabricación
                                |
Manufacturer.                   |Manufacturero, fabricante.
                                |
Margin.                         |Margen.
                                |
Marine (navy).                  |Marina.
                                |
Maritime course.                |Rumbo, derrota.
                                |
Maritime insurance.             |Seguro marítimo.
                                |
Maritime intercourse.           |Relaciones marítimas.
                                |
Mark.                           |Marca; (coin) marco.
                                |
Market.                         |Mercado, plaza.
                                |
Mast.                           |Mástil, palo.
                                |
Master.                         |Capitán, patrón.
                                |
Mate.                           |Piloto.
                                |
Maturity.                       |Vencimiento.
                                |
Means.                          |Medios.
                                |
Means of transport.             |Medio de transporte.
                                |
Measure.                        |Medida.
                                |
Measures of capacity.           |Medidas de capacidad.
                                |
Measures of length.             |Medidas lineales.
                                |
Mechanical work.                |Trabajo mecánico.
                                |
Meeting.                        |Reunión.
                                |
Memorandum.                     |Memorándum, nota.
                                |
Mercantile agency.              |Agencia comercial.
                                |
Merchandise.                    |Mercancías, géneros.
                                |
Merchant.                       |Comerciante.
                                |
Merchantman.                    |Buque mercante.
                                |
Message.                        |Mensaje.
                                |
Messenger.                      |Mensajero.
                                |
Middleman.                      |Intermediario.
                                |
Mine.                           |Mina.
                                |
Mistake.                        |Error.
                                |
Misunderstanding.               |Mala inteligencia.
                                |
Mixed train.                    |Tren mixto.
                                |
Mizzen mast.                    |Palo de mesana.
                                |
Model.                          |Modelo.
                                |
Monetary matters.               |Asuntos monetarios.
                                |
Monetary system.                |Sistema monetario.
                                |
Money.                          |Dinero, moneda.
                                |
Monopoly.                       |Monopolio.
                                |
Month.                          |Mes.
                                |
Monthly balance.                |Balance mensual.
                                |
Mortgage.                       |Hipoteca.
                                |
Mortgagee.                      |Acreedor hipotecario.
                                |
Mortgager.                      |Deudor hipotecario.
                                |
Motion.                         |Movimiento; proposición.
                                |
Mountain railway.               |Ferrocarril de montaña.
                                |
Mouth of a river.               |Embocadura de un río.
                                |
Movables.                       |Bienes muebles.
                                |
                                |
Name.                           |Nombre.
                                |
Narrow gauge.                   |Vía estrecha.
                                |
National bank.                  |Banco nacional.
                                |
National debt.                  |Deuda pública (nacional).
                                |
Naval affairs.                  |Asuntos marítimos.
                                |
Navigable water.                |Aguas navegables.
                                |
Navigation.                     |Navegación.
                                |
Navigation by towboats.         |Navegación a remolque.
                                |
Navigator.                      |Navegador, navegante, marino.
                                |
Navy.                           |Marina.
                                |
Negotiation.                    |Negociación.
                                |
Net for small parcels.          |Red, rejilla.
                                |
Net price.                      |Precio neto.
                                |
Net profit.                     |Ganancia neta.
                                |
Net receipts.                   |Entrada neta.
                                |
Net weight.                     |Peso neto.
                                |
Network of railways.            |Red de ferrocarriles.
                                |
Night express.                  |Expreso de noche.
                                |
Night train.                    |Tren de noche.
                                |
Nominal value.                  |Valor nominal.
                                |
Normal freight.                 |Flete normal.
                                |
Normal track.                   |Vía normal.
                                |
Notary public.                  |Escribano público.
                                |
Note.                           |Nota.
                                |
Notice, to give.                |Dar aviso.
                                |
Notice, to take.                |Tomar nota.
                                |
Novelty.                        |Novedad.
                                |
Number.                         |Número.
                                |
                                |
Offer.                          |Oferta.
                                |
Office.                         |Oficina.
                                |
Officer.                        |Oficial.
                                |
Opening of a railway            |Inauguración de una
section.                        |sección de ferrocarril.
                                |
Option.                         |Opción.
                                |
Order book.                     |Libro de órdenes.
                                |
Outbidding.                     |Puja; mayor postura.
                                |
Output.                         |Producción.
                                |
Outstanding debts.              |Deudas activas.
                                |
Overcharge, to.                 |Cobrar demasiado; sobrecargar.
                                |
Overdue.                        |Atrasado; vencido.
                                |
Overfreight, to.                |Sobrecargar.
                                |
Overland mail for India.        |Correo por tierra para las Indias.
                                |
Overload, to.                   |Sobrecargar.
                                |
Overstocked (the market).       |Sobrecargado, abrumado.
                                |
Overweight, excess              |Sobrepeso; exceso de
weight.                         |peso.
                                |
Owner.                          |Dueño, propietario; (of ships) armador.
                                |
                                |
Pack-cloth.                     |Arpillera.
                                |
Package.                        |Bulto.
                                |
Packet.                         |Paquete.
                                |
Packing.                        |Embalaje.
                                |
Parapet.                        |Parapeto.
                                |
Parcels post.                   |Correo de paquetes.
                                |
Partner.                        |Socio.
                                |
Partnership.                    |Asociación, sociedad.
                                |
Passage down river.             |Travesía río abajo.
                                |
Passage out and home.           |Viaje de ida y vuelta.
                                |
Passenger.                      |Pasajero, viajero.
                                |
Passenger carriage.             |Coche de viajeros.
                                |
Passenger steamer.              |Vapor de pasaje.
                                |
Passengers' luggage.            |Equipaje.
                                |
Passenger traffic.              |Tráfico de viajeros.
                                |
Passenger train.                |Tren de viajeros.
                                |
Passport.                       |Pasaporte.
                                |
Patent.                         |Patente, privilegio (de invención).
                                |
Patentee.                       |Privilegiado.
                                |
Patron.                         |Protector.
                                |
Pattern.                        |Muestra.
                                |
Pawn, to.                       |Empeñar.
                                |
Pawnbroker.                     |Prendero.
                                |
Pay-day.                        |Día de pago.
                                |
Payable to bearer.              |Pagadero al portador.
                                |
Payable to order.               |Pagadero a la orden.
                                |
Payment in advance.             |Pago adelantado.
                                |
Payment of duty.                |Pago de derechos.
                                |
Payment of interest.            |Pago de interés.
                                |
Payment received.               |Pago recibido.
                                |
Pennant.                        |Banderola.
                                |
Percentage.                     |Porcentaje; tanto por ciento.
                                |
Permit.                         |Permiso.
                                |
Perusal.                        |Lectura.
                                |
Petition.                       |Súplica, petición, memorial.
                                |
Petty expenses.                 |Gastos menores.
                                |
Piece.                          |Pieza.
                                |
Pier.                           |Muelle.
                                |
Pilot.                          |Práctico.
                                |
Pilotage.                       |Practicaje.
                                |
Place.                          |Lugar.
                                |
Plaintiff.                      |Demandante.
                                |
Plan.                           |Plan, proyecto; plano.
                                |
Pledge.                         |Empeño, prenda.
                                |
Policy of insurance.            |Póliza de seguro.
                                |
Pontoon.                        |Pontón.
                                |
Port.                           |Puerto; (larboard) babor.
                                |
Port dues.                      |Derechos de puerto.
                                |
Port of exportation.            |Puerto de exportación.
                                |
Porter.                         |Mozo.
                                |
Porterage.                      |Conducción.
                                |
Position.                       |Posición, situación.
                                |
Post, by return of.             |A vuelta de correo.
                                |
Post-card.                      |Tarjeta postal.
                                |
Postage book.                   |Libro de portes de cartas.
                                |
Postdate.                       |Posfecha.
                                |
Postscript.                     |Posdata.
                                |
Predecessor.                    |Predecesor, antecesor.
                                |
Prejudice.                      |Perjuicio.
                                |
Premises.                       |Local.
                                |
Premium.                        |Prima, premio.
                                |
Prepaid.                        |Franqueado; porte pagado.
                                |
Preparatory work.               |Trabajo preparatorio.
                                |
Prepayment.                     |Pago adelantado, anticipado.
                                |
Prerogative.                    |Prerrogativa , privilegio.
                                |
Previous calculation.           |Previo cálculo.
                                |
Price.                          |Precio.
                                |
Price-list.                     |Lista de precios, precio corriente.
                                |
Primage.                        |Capa.
                                |
Principal station.              |Estación principal.
                                |
Principal track.                |Vía principal.
                                |
Principle.                      |Principio.
                                |
Priority bonds.                 |Vales de prioridad.
                                |
Private account.                |Cuenta particular.
                                |
Private and confidential.       |Particular,  privado, reservado.
                                |
Private carriage.               |Coche particular.
                                |
Privateer.                      |Corsario.
                                |
Privately.                      |Privadamente, reservadamente.
                                |
Proceeds.                       |Producto, producido.
                                |
Procuration.                    |Poder.
                                |
Produce.                        |Productos.
                                |
Product.                        |Producto.
                                |
Profit.                         |Ganancia.
                                |
Profitableness.                 |Utilidad.
                                |
Proforma account.               |Cuenta simulada.
                                |
Prohibition of export.          |Prohibición de la exportación.
                                |
Promissory note.                |Pagaré.
                                |
Promoter.                       |Promotor.
                                |
Property.                       |Propiedad.
                                |
Proportion of alloy             |Cantidad de liga (en
(in money).                     |la moneda).
                                |
Proposal.                       |Proposición, propuesta.
                                |
Proprietor.                     |Propietario.
                                |
Prospectus.                     |Prospecto.
                                |
Protection.                     |Protección, acogida.
                                |
Protest.                        |Protesto.
                                |
Protest charges.                |Gastos de protesto.
                                |
Provision dealer.               |Comerciante de víveres.
                                |
Proxy.                          |Apoderado.
                                |
Public funds.                   |Fondos públicos.
                                |
Pulley.                         |Polea.
                                |
Purchase book.                  |Libro de compras.
                                |
Purchaser.                      |Comprador.
                                |
Purveyor to the court.          |Proveedor de la Familia Real.
                                |
                                |
Qualifications.                 |Calidades, prendas.
                                |
Quality.                        |Calidad.
                                |
Quantity.                       |Cantidad.
                                |
Quarantine.                     |Cuarentena.
                                |
Quarter.                        |Trimestre.
                                |
Quarterly.                      |Trimestral(mente).
                                |
Quay.                           |Muelle.
                                |
Question.                       |Cuestión.
                                |
Quotation.                      |Cotización.
                                |
                                |
Rack railway.                   |Ferrocarril de cremallera.
                                |
Rail.                           |Carril, rail.
                                |
Railway carriage.               |Coche de ferrocarril.
                                |
Railway line.                   |Linea de ferrocarril.
                                |
Railway loan.                   |Empréstito de ferrocarril.
                                |
Railway share.                  |Acción de ferrocarril.
                                |
Railway station.                |Estación de ferrocarril.
                                |
Railway store.                  |Almacén de ferrocarril.
                                |
Railway tariff.                 |Tarifa de ferrocarril.
                                |
Railway time-table.             |Indicador (de ferrocarriles); horario.
                                |
Rate.                           |Tipo.
                                |
Raw material.                   |Primera materia.
                                |
Rebate.                         |Rebaja.
                                |
Receipt.                        |Recibo.
                                |
Receipt in full.                |Finiquito.
                                |
Receipts.                       |Entradas, ingresos.
                                |
Receipts of a day.              |Entradas de un día.
                                |
Receiver.                       |Receptor.
                                |
Receiving office.               |Despacho de equipajes.
                                |
Reckless selling.               |Ventas al acaso.
                                |
Rectification.                  |Rectificación.
                                |
Redemption.                     |Reembolso, amortización.
                                |
Reduction.                      |Rebaja, reducción.
                                |
Reduction of freight.           |Reducción del flete.
                                |
Reduction of passage money.     |Reducción del pasaje.
                                |
Reduction of price.             |Reducción del precio.
                                |
Reduction of taxes.             |Reducción de los impuestos.
                                |
Reduction of value.             |Reducción del valor.
                                |
Re-exportation.                 |Reexportación.
                                |
Reference.                      |Referencia.
                                |
Refunding of duty.              |Devolución de derechos.
                                |
Refusal of goods.               |Rechazo de mercancías.
                                |
Refusal of payment.             |Resistencia al pago.
                                |
Refuse.                         |Desechos.
                                |
Reimbursement.                  |Reembolso.
                                |
Reimbursement of freight.       |Reembolso del flete.
                                |
Reimportation.                  |Reimportación.
                                |
Release.                        |Liberación, exención.
                                |
Reloading.                      |Reembarque.
                                |
Remainder.                      |Resto.
                                |
Remittance.                     |Remesa.
                                |
Remitter.                       |Remitente.
                                |
Rent.                           |Alquiler.
                                |
Repairs.                        |Reparaciones.
                                |
Reply.                          |Respuesta, contestación.
                                |
Report.                         |Informe.
                                |
Reputation.                     |Reputación.
                                |
Request.                        |Ruego.
                                |
Reserve.                        |Reserva.
                                |
Resources.                      |Recursos.
                                |
Respite for payment of freight. |Plazo para el pago del flete.
                                |
Responsibility.                 |Responsabilidad.
                                |
Result.                         |Resultado.
                                |
Retail.                         |Al por menor.
                                |
Retail dealer.                  |Comerciante al por menor.
                                |
Retail sale.                    |Venta al por menor.
                                |
Retail trade.                   |Comercio al por menor.
                                |
Retailer.                       |Detallista.
                                |
Retirement.                     |Retirada.
                                |
Return freight.                 |Flete de vuelta.
                                |
Return passage.                 |Pasaje de regreso.
                                |
Return ticket.                  |Billete de ida y vuelta.
                                |
Revenue.                        |Renta.
                                |
Rider.                          |Añadido.
                                |
Rigging.                        |Aparejo.
                                |
Right of retention.             |Derecho de retención.
                                |
Right of search.                |Derecho de visita.
                                |
Rise.                           |Alza, subida.
                                |
Risk.                           |Riesgo.
                                |
Rival railway.                  |Ferrocarril competidor.
                                |
River freight.                  |Flete fluvial.
                                |
Rolling stock.                  |Material rodante.
                                |
Rudder.                         |Timón.
                                |
Ruinous prices.                 |Precios ruinosos.
                                |
Running account.                |Cuenta corriente.
                                |
                                |
Safe.                           |Caja fuerte.
                                |
Safety signal.                  |Señal de seguridad.
                                |
Safety valve.                   |Válvula de seguridad.
                                |
Sail.                           |Vela.
                                |
Sail-yard.                      |Verga.
                                |
Sailing vessel.                 |Buque de vela.
                                |
Salary.                         |Salario, sueldo.
                                |
Sale.                           |Venta.
                                |
Sales book.                     |Libro de ventas.
                                |
Salvage.                        |Salvamento.
                                |
Sample.                         |Muestra.
                                |
Sample-book.                    |Muestrario.
                                |
Sample depot.                   |Depósito de muestras.
                                |
Saving.                         |Ahorro, economía.
                                |
Scarcity.                       |Escasez.
                                |
Scheme.                         |Plan, proyecto.
                                |
Schooner.                       |Goleta.
                                |
Screw steamer.                  |Vapor de hélice.
                                |
Scrip.                          |Vales.
                                |
Sea.                            |Mar.
                                |
Sea damage.                     |Avería.
                                |
Sea freight.                    |Flete.
                                |
Seaport.                        |Puerto del mar.
                                |
Seaworthiness.                  |Navegabilidad.
                                |
Seaworthy.                      |Marinero.
                                |
Section of a railway.           |Sección de un ferrocarril.
                                |
Securities.                     |Valores.
                                |
Security.                       |Garantía, caución.
                                |
Seizure.                        |Embargo.
                                |
Selection.                      |Surtido.
                                |
Seller.                         |Vendedor.
                                |
Selling off.                    |Liquidación.
                                |
Selling price.                  |Precio de venta.
                                |
Sender.                         |Remitente.
                                |
Service.                        |Servicio.
                                |
Settlement.                     |Arreglo, ajuste, liquidación
                                |
Settling day.                   |Día de liquidación.
                                |
Shaft.                          |Arbol, eje.
                                |
Shallow.                        |Bajío.
                                |
Share.                          |Acción.
                                |
Share of freight.               |Parte del flete.
                                |
Shareholder.                    |Accionista.
                                |
Shed.                           |Tinglado.
                                |
Sheet anchor.                   |Ancla de la esperanza.
                                |
Ship.                           |Buque.
                                |
Ship-broker.                    |Corredor de buques.
                                |
Ship's course.                  |Rumbo, derrota.
                                |
Shipment.                       |Embarque.
                                |
Shipper.                        |Embarcador, cargador, remitente.
                                |
Shipping.                       |Buques.
                                |
Shipping expenses.              |Gastos de embarque.
                                |
Shipwreck.                      |Naufragio.
                                |
Shorthand.                      |Taquigrafía.
                                |
Shorthand-writer.               |Taquígrafo.
                                |
Sight.                          |Vista.
                                |
Signal of departure.            |Señal de salida.
                                |
Signature.                      |Firma.
                                |
Signer.                         |Firmante.
                                |
Single ticket.                  |Billete sencillo.
                                |
Single track.                   |Vía única.
                                |
Sinking fund.                   |Caja de amortización.
                                |
Situation.                      |Situación, posición; colocación, puesto.
                                |
Slide valve.                    |Válvula de corredera.
                                |
Slope.                          |Declive, cuesta.
                                |
Slow train.                     |Tren ordinario.
                                |
Sluice, lock.                   |Esclusa.
                                |
Smoking compartment             |Departamento para fumadores.
                                |
Sole bill of exchange.          |Sola de cambio.
                                |
Solicitor.                      |Abogado.
                                |
Solvency.                       |Solvencia.
                                |
Spare time.                     |Ratos de ocio.
                                |
Special train.                  |Tren especial.
                                |
Specie.                         |Metálico.
                                |
Specification.                  |Especificación.
                                |
Specimen.                       |Muestra.
                                |
Speculation.                    |Especulación.
                                |
Speculator.                     |Especulador.
                                |
Spring tide.                    |Marea viva.
                                |
Square measure.                 |Medida cuadrada.
                                |
Staff.                          |Personal.
                                |
Stamp.                          |Sello, timbre, estampilla.
                                |
Stamp duty.                     |Derecho de timbre.
                                |
Standard.                       |Tipo, patrón.
                                |
Starboard.                      |Estribor.
                                |
Statement.                      |Estado de cuenta.
                                |
Station.                        |Estación.
                                |
Steam engine.                   |Máquina de vapor.
                                |
Steam navigation line.          |Linea de vapores.
                                |
Steam power.                    |Fuerza de vapor.
                                |
Stem.                           |Proa, roda, tajamar.
                                |
Stern.                          |Popa.
                                |
Stevedore.                      |Estivador.
                                |
Stock.                          |Existencias.
                                |
Stock-broker.                   |Corredor de cambios.
                                |
Stock-holder.                   |Accionista.
                                |
Stock-jobbing.                  |Agiotaje.
                                |
Stock on hand.                  |Existencias; mercancías en almacén.
                                |
Store.                          |Almacén.
                                |
Store book.                     |Libro de almacén.
                                |
Storing of goods.               |Almacenaje.
                                |
Stowage.                        |Estiva.
                                |
Straits, difficulties.          |Dificultades.
                                |
Stranding.                      |Encalladura.
                                |
Strike.                         |Huelga.
                                |
Striker.                        |Huelguista.
                                |
Subject to duty.                |Sujeto a derechos.
                                |
Submarine.                      |Submarino.
                                |
Subscriber.                     |Suscritor, abonado.
                                |
Successor.                      |Sucesor.
                                |
Suggestion.                     |Sugestión.
                                |
Suit (at law).                  |Pleito, causa.
                                |
Sum.                            |Suma.
                                |
Summary.                        |Sumario, resumen.
                                |
Superannuation.                 |Jubilación.
                                |
Supercargo.                     |Sobrecargo.
                                |
Superior power.                 |Fuerza mayor.
                                |
Supertax.                       |Sobretasa.
                                |
Supplementary tickets.          |Billetes suplementarios.
                                |
Supplier.                       |Abastecedor.
                                |
Supply.                         |Surtido, provisión.
                                |
Surcharge                       |Recargo.
                                |
Surety.                         |Fiador; fianza.
                                |
Surplus.                        |Sobrante.
                                |
Surtax.                         |Sobretasa.
                                |
Survey.                         |Inspección.
                                |
Surveyor.                       |Inspector.
                                |
Suspension of payment.          |Suspensión de pagos.
                                |
Sweater.                        |Explotador.
                                |
Swindler.                       |Estafador.
                                |
System.                         |Sistema.
                                |
                                |
Table.                          |Cuadro; mesa.
                                |
Tare.                           |Tara.
                                |
Tariff.                         |Tarifa; (customs) arancel.
                                |
Tax.                            |Impuesto,  contribución.
                                |
Taxation.                       |Imposición de contribuciones.
                                |
Telegram.                       |Telegrama.
                                |
Telegraph.                      |Telégrafo.
                                |
Telephone.                      |Teléfono.
                                |
Temporary bridge.               |Puente provisorio.
                                |
Temporary railway.              |Ferrocarril provisorio.
                                |
Tender.                         |Ténder; oferta.
                                |
Terms.                          |Condiciones.
                                |
Terminus.                       |Estación terminal.
                                |
Ticket.                         |Billete.
                                |
Ticket office.                  |Despacho de billetes.
                                |
Timber.                         |Madera.
                                |
Time of departure.              |Hora de salida (partida).
                                |
Time limit.                     |Plazo.
                                |
Tin-lined.                      |Forrado de hoja de lata.
                                |
Tonnage.                        |Tonelaje.
                                |
Tonnage duty.                   |Derechos de tonelaje.
                                |
Total receipts.                 |Entradas totales, ingresos totales.
                                |
Total weight.                   |Peso total.
                                |
Towage.                         |Remolque.
                                |
Track (railway).                |Vía.
                                |
Traction power.                 |Fuerza de tracción.
                                |
Trade.                          |Comercio.
                                |
Trade mark.                     |Marca de fábrica.
                                |
Trade winds; monsoon.           |Vientos generales; monzón.
                                |
Tradesman.                      |Comerciante, mercader.
                                |
Traffic.                        |Tráfico.
                                |
Train.                          |Tren.
                                |
Tramway.                        |Tranvía.
                                |
Transaction.                    |Transacción, operación.
                                |
Transfer.                       |Traspaso.
                                |
Transit.                        |Tránsito.
                                |
Transit bond.                   |Certificado de tránsito.
                                |
Transit duty.                   |Derechos de tránsito.
                                |
Transit freight.                |Flete de tránsito.
                                |
Transit goods.                  |Mercancías de tránsito.
                                |
Transit pass.                   |Certificado de tránsito.
                                |
Transit tariff.                 |Tarifa de tránsito.
                                |
Translation.                    |Traducción.
                                |
Transport insurance.            |Seguro de transporte.
                                |
Travelling expenses.            |Gastos de viaje.
                                |
Travelling trunk.               |Maleta.
                                |
Trial.                          |Ensayo, prueba.
                                |
Trouble.                        |Molestia.
                                |
Truck.                          |Carretilla, furgón.
                                |
Truss.                          |Fardito.
                                |
Trust.                          |Confianza; combinación.
                                |
Trustee.                        |Síndico.
                                |
Tug.                            |Remolcador.
                                |
Turnbridge.                     |Puente giratorio.
                                |
Turntable.                      |Placa giratoria.
                                |
Typist.                         |Dactilógrafo, mecanógrafo.
                                |
Typewriter.                     |Máquina de escribir.
                                |
                                |
Unclaimed luggage.              |Equipaje no reclamado.
                                |
Underground railway, tube.      |Ferrocarril subterráneo.
                                |
Undersigned.                    |Infrascrito; abajo firmado.
                                |
Understanding.                  |Acuerdo, arreglo.
                                |
Undertaking.                    |Empresa.
                                |
Underwriter.                    |Asegurador.
                                |
Unsaleable.                     |Invendible.
                                |
Unseaworthy.                    |Innavegable.
                                |
Up the river.                   |Río arriba.
                                |
Urgent.                         |Urgente.
                                |
Usance.                         |Uso, usanza.
                                |
                                |
Vacancy.                        |Vacante.
                                |
Valuation.                      |Avalúo, valuación.
                                |
Value.                          |Valor.
                                |
Valve.                          |Válvula.
                                |
Verdict.                        |Veredicto, sentencia.
                                |
Vessel.                         |Buque.
                                |
Viaduct.                        |Viaducto.
                                |
Victualling (of a ship).        |Abastecimiento.
                                |
Voucher.                        |Comprobante.
                                |
                                |
Wages.                          |Jornales, sueldo.
                                |
Wagon-load.                     |Carretada.
                                |
Waiting-room.                   |Sala de espera.
                                |
Warehouse.                      |Almacén.
                                |
Warehouse rent.                 |Almacenaje.
                                |
Warrant.                        |Certificado, resguardo.
                                |
Waste-book.                     |Borrador.
                                |
Water-line.                     |Linea de flotación.
                                |
Water-mark.                     |Nivel del agua; (in paper) filigrana.
                                |
Way-bill.                       |Boleta de expedición.
                                |
Week.                           |Semana.
                                |
Weekly.                         |Semanal(mente).
                                |
Weighing of luggage.            |Pesada del equipaje.
                                |
Weight and standard             |Peso y tipo normales
of coins.                       |de monedas.
                                |
Wharf.                          |Muelle.
                                |
Wharfage.                       |Derechos de muelle.
                                |
Wholesale.                      |Al por mayor.
                                |
Wholesale business.             |Negocios al por mayor.
                                |
Wholesale dealer.               |Comerciante al por mayor.
                                |
Wide gauge.                     |Vía ancha.
                                |
Winch crank.                    |Manivela.
                                |
Wire-rope railway.              |Ferrocarril funicular.
                                |
Withdrawal.                     |Retirada.
                                |
Witness.                        |Testigo.
                                |
Working expenses.               |Gastos de explotación.
                                |
Workmanship.                    |Hechura.
                                |
Workshop.                       |Taller.
                                |
Wreck.                          |Naufragio.
                                |
Wreckage.                       |Restos de naufragio.
                                |
                                |
Yard (of a ship).               |Verga.
                                |
Year.                           |Año.
                                |
Yearly.                         |Anual(mente).
                                |
Yield.                          |Producto, rendimiento.


  ENGLISH, AMERICAN AND SPANISH COINS,
  MEASURES AND WEIGHTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

  MONEDAS, MEDIDAS Y PESOS
  INGLESES, AMERICANOS Y ESPAÑOLES.


COINS.                   |MONEDAS.
                         |
£1, a pound.             |Una libra (25 pesetas[30]).
                         |
10/-, a half-sovereign.  |Media libra (12.50 pesetas).
                         |
5/-, a crown.            |Una corona (6.25 pesetas).
                         |
2/6, a half-crown.       |Media corona (3.13 pesetas).
                         |
2/-, a florin.           |Un florín (2.50 pesetas).
                         |
1/-, a shilling.         |Un chelín (1.25 pesetas).
                         |
6d., a sixpence.         |Medio chelín (60 céntimos).
                         |
3d., a threepenny piece. |Pieza de tres peniques (30 céntimos).
                         |
1d., a penny.            |Un penique (10 céntimos).
                         |
1/2d., a halfpenny.      |Medio penique (5 céntimos).
                         |
$1, a dollar.            |Un duro (5 pesetas).
                         |
1c., a cent.             |Un centavo (5 céntimos).
                         |
25-peseta piece (£1).    |Un centén.
                         |
1 dollar (4/-).          |Un duro.
                         |
1 peseta (9-1/2d.).      |Una peseta.
                         |
1/2 peseta (5d.).        |Media peseta.
                         |
10 céntimos (1d.).       |Diez céntimos.[31]
                         |
5 céntimos (1/2d.).      |Cinco céntimos.


       *       *       *       *       *

                                     |
MEASURES.                            |MEDIDAS.
                                     |
1 mile (1760 yards).                 |Una milla (1609.31 metros).
                                     |
1 yard.                              |Una yarda (91.44 centímetros)
                                     |
1 foot.                              |Un pie (30.48 centímetros)
                                     |
1 inch.                              |Una pulgada (2.54 centímetros).
                                     |
1 cubic foot.                        |Un pie cúbico
                                     |  (28.315 decímetros cúbicos).
                                     |
1 square foot.                       |Un pie cuadrado
                                     |  (929 centímetros cuadrados).
                                     |
1 kilometre (1093.63 yards).         |Un kilómetro.
                                     |
1 metre (1.094 yards).               |Un metro.
                                     |
1 centimetre  (0.393 inch).          |Un centímetro.
                                     |
1 millimetre   (0.039 inch).         |Un milímetro.
                                     |
1 cubic metre (35.3 cubic feet).     |Un metro cúbico.
                                     |
1 square metre (1.196 square yards). |Un metro cuadrado.


       *       *       *       *       *


  WEIGHTS.                         | PESOS.
                                   |
1 ton.                             |Una tonelada (1016.048 kilogramos).
                                   |
1 hundredweight.                   |Un quintal inglés (50.80 kilogramos.)
                                   |
1 pound.                           |Una libra (0.45 kilogramo).
                                   |
1 ounce.                           |Una onza (28.35 gramos).
                                   |
1 kilogramme (2.205 lbs.).         |Un kilogramo.
                                   |
1 gramme (0.002 lb.).              |Un gramo.
                                   |
1 metrical ton (0.98 English ton). |Una tonelada métrica.


       *       *       *       *       *
                         |
TROY WEIGHTS.            |PESOS MEDICINALES, ETC.
                         |
1 pound (16 oz.)         |Una libra (373.238 gramos).
                         |
1 ounce.                 |Una onza (31.103 gramos).
                         |
1 grain.                 |Un grano (0.065 gramo).
                         |
1 gramme (15.43 grains). |Un gramo.


       *       *       *       *       *
                      |
LIQUID MEASURES.      |MEDIDAS PARA LIQUIDOS.
                      |
1 gallon.             |Un galón (4.54 litros).
                      |
1 quart.              |Un cuarto de galón (1.14 litros).
                      |
1 pint.               |Una pinta (0.57 litro).
                      |
1 litre (1.76 pints). |Un litro.


       *       *       *       *       *

                         |
LAND MEASURES.           |MEDIDAS AGRARIAS.
                         |
1 acre.                  |Un acre (0.405 hectárea).
                         |
1 hectare (2.471 acres). |Una hectárea.


       *       *       *       *       *


THE BEST BOOKS TO LEARN SPANISH

HOSSFELD'S

NEW PRACTICAL METHOD FOR LEARNING

THE

SPANISH LANGUAGE

BY

TOMÁS ENRIQUE GURRIN

_Revised and Enlarged by_

FERNANDO DE ARTEAGA, HON. M.A.

_Taylorian Teacher of Spanish in the University of Oxford_

  Fourth Revised Edition, with a Vocabulary
  Crown Octavo, 436 pages. Cloth

  =A Key to the Exercises in the above work
  is also issued=

_HOSSFELD'S EDUCATIONAL PUBLICATIONS_

HOSSFELD'S

New English and Spanish Vocabulary

Alphabetical and Analogical

BY

FERNANDO DE ARTEAGA, HON. M.A.

  _Taylorian Teacher of Spanish in the University of Oxford_

  =In one pocket volume of 740 pages, cloth=

     This is the fullest and most up-to-date Vocabulary extant. It will
     greatly facilitate the SYSTEMATIC acquirement of the _materials_ of
     the language, arranged in groups embracing the principal
     Departments of Knowledge.

Spanish Commercial Correspondence

And TECHNICALITIES, Etc.

BY

W. N. CORNETT, MEDALLIST, ETC., SOCIETY OF ARTS

  _Ex-Modern Language Master, Liverpool Municipal Technical
  Classes._

  Third Edition, Revised

  Crown 8vo, 180 pages, cloth

  COMPLETE CATALOGUE POST FREE UPON
  APPLICATION


A NEW

SPANISH DICTIONARY

Based upon the

Latest Edition of the Dictionary of the Spanish Academy:

  Containing the Scientific, Military, Commercial,
  Technical and Nautical Terms.

  Part  I. =SPANISH-ENGLISH.=

  Part II. =ENGLISH-SPANISH.=

  16mo.      674 pages.      Cloth.


THE

SHIPPING CLERKS', CORRESPONDENTS' AND

TRAVELLERS'

HANDBOOK OF SPANISH

  INVOICING, INSURANCE, BOOK-KEEPING,
  LEGAL AND TECHNICAL TERMS, WITH
  SPANISH POWERS OF ATTORNEY, CABLE
  INQUIRY CODE.

  Tables of the English and Metric Systems of Weights
  and Measures, Short cuts to Metric Calculations,
  Coinage Conversion, etc., etc.

BY

FRANK THOMAS,

  _Late Professor of Modern Languages at Blackburn Technical Schools_

  Demy Octavo. Cloth.


HOSSFELD'S

MODERN SPANISH READER

  comprising

  A Collection of Stories of Three well-known Modern
  Spanish Authors,

  _Edited with Grammatical and Explanatory Notes_

BY

WILLIAM O'DOHERTY,

  Teacher of Spanish at the Aston Manor Technical Institute,
  Birmingham.

  Crown Octavo. 78 pages. Wrappers.


SPANISH COMPOSITION

  comprising

  A Selection of Anecdotes and Passages from the best
  English Authors,

  _For translation into Spanish, with Explanatory Notes_

BY

GEORGE R. MACDONALD,

  Teacher at the Manchester Municipal School of Commerce;
  Society of Arts Silver Medallist and First Prizeman for
  Spanish and Portuguese.

  Crown Octavo. 112 pages. Cloth.

_UNIFORM WITH THIS WORK_

       *       *       *       *       *

=Hossfeld's English and French Dialogues.=

With a Vocabulary, a Chapter on Pronunciation and the Conjugation of the
Regular and Irregular Verbs. New edition, entirely revised and enlarged.

  By A. HAUVILLER.   16mo, 260 pages, cloth.


=Hossfeld's English & Portuguese Dialogues.=

With a Vocabulary, a Chapter on Pronunciation and the Conjugation of the
Regular and Irregular Verbs.

  By AMADEO TOLEDANO.   16mo, 270 pages, cloth.


=Hossfeld's English and Italian Dialogues.=

With a Vocabulary, a Chapter on Pronunciation and the Conjugation of the
Regular and Irregular Verbs.

  By T. ARTHUR PLUMPTON, Professor to the Military
  Presidio of Turin, etc.      16mo, 261 pages, cloth.


=Hossfeld's English and German Dialogues.=

With a Vocabulary, a Chapter on Pronunciation and the Conjugation of the
Regular and Irregular Verbs. New Edition, entirely revised and enlarged.

  By A. HAUVILLER.        16mo, 300 pages, cloth.


=Hossfeld's English and Dutch Dialogues.=

With a Vocabulary, a Chapter on Pronunciation and the Conjugation of the
Regular and Irregular Verbs. New Edition, thoroughly revised and
enlarged.

  By J. M. SCHNITZLER.    16mo, 250 pages, cloth.

=Hossfeld's Educational Works.=

                                                              _s. d._

  =Japanese.=

  Hossfeld's English-Japanese Grammar, comprising a
  Manual of th Spoken Language in the Roman
  Character, together with Dialogues on several subjects,
  and Two Vocabularies of Useful Words, by H. J. Weintz       net 10 6

  Appendix to Hossfeld's English-Japanese Grammar,
  comprising a Graduated Series of Exercises on the
  Whole Work, Extracts from the Leading Authors,
  Exercises in the Native Characters, and two
  Vocabularies, by H. J. Weintz                               net  3 0

  Hossfeld's Japanese Reader, comprising a Graduated
  Series of Extracts from the leading Authors, with
  copious Footnotes and a Vocabulary; Part I.
  Elementary; Part II. Advanced, by H. J.
  Weintz                                                      net  3 0


=Russian.=

  English-Russian Grammar, by Hossfeld's New
  Method                                                           4 0


=Swedish.=

  Hossfeld's English-Swedish and Swedish-English
  Dictionary                                                  net  4 0

       *       *       *       *       *

  HIRSCHFELD BROTHERS, LTD., PUBLISHERS,
  263, HIGH HOLBORN, LONDON, W.C.
  40 & 42, UNIVERSITY AVENUE, GLASGOW.
  133, NORTH THIRTEENTH STREET, PHILADELPHIA.


=Italian.=

                                                               _s. d._

  English-Italian Grammar, by Hossfeld's New
  Method                                                           3 0

  Conjugation of Italian Verbs                                 net 0 6

  Italian-English and English-Italian Dictionary, by
  Melzi                                                        net 6 0

  Hossfeld's Idiomatic Italian Composition, by R. A. S.
  Rankin                                                       net 2 0

  Italian Reader, by Scotti                                        2 0

  Hossfeld's English and Italian Dialogues                         1 6

  Hossfeld's Dialoghi Italiani                                     1 6


=Hebrew.=

  Robertson, Hebrew Exercises                                  net 2 6


=Dano-Norwegian.=

  English-Dano-Norwegian and Dano-Norwegian-English
  Dictionary                                                   net 4 0

       *       *       *       *       *

  Illness and Death of Napoleon Bonaparte. By
  Arnold Chaplin, M.D.                                         net 2 6

  Letters of a Professional Man. By B. Myers                   net 2 0

       *       *       *       *       *

  HIRSCHFELD BROTHERS, LTD., PUBLISHERS,
  263, HIGH HOLBORN, LONDON, W.C.
  40 & 42, UNIVERSITY AVENUE, GLASGOW.
  133, NORTH THIRTEENTH STREET, PHILADELPHIA.


=Dutch.=

                                                               _s. d._

  English-Dutch Grammar, by Hossfeld's New
  Method                                                           4 0

  Conjugation of Dutch Verbs                                   net 0 6

  English and Dutch Dialogues                                      1 6

  Hossfeld's English-Dutch and Dutch-English
  Dictionary                                                   net 4 0


=Portuguese.=

  English-Portuguese Grammar, by Hossfeld's New
  Method                                                           4 0

  Conjugation of Portuguese Verbs                              net 0 6

  Hossfeld's Portuguese Commercial Correspondence
  and Technicalities, by Cornett                                   2 6

  English and Portuguese Dialogues                                 1 6

       *       *       *       *       *

  Consumption: A Curable and Preventable Disease.
  By L. F. Flick, M.D.                                         net 5 0

  Life: Its Origin and Energy Mechanism. By
  Jadroo                                                       net 1 0

  Hints on Language. By R. Isnard                              net 1 6

  Courage of Christ. By Rev. H. C. Schuyler, S.T.L.            net 2 6

  Charity of Christ.       ditto                               net 2 6

  Obedience of Christ.     ditto                               net 2 6

       *       *       *       *       *

  HIRSCHFELD BROTHERS, LTD., PUBLISHERS,
  263, HIGH HOLBORN, LONDON, W.C.
  40 & 42, UNIVERSITY AVENUE, GLASGOW.
  133, NORTH THIRTEENTH STREET, PHILADELPHIA.

       *       *       *       *       *


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

Multíciples=> Multíplices {pg viii}

el football, el balonpie=> el football, el balonpie {pg 29}

un taximetro=> un taxímetro {pg 33}

un vahido, un vértigo=> un vahido, un vértigo {pg 39}

el buho=> el búho {pg 64}

diez y neuve (diecinueve)=> diez y nueve (diecinueve) {pg 78}

viente y dos (veintidós) viente y tres (veintitrés)=> veinte y dos
(veintidós) veinte y tres (veintitrés) {pg 78}

flúido=> fluido {pg 115}

indigno, inútil, desapreciable=> indigno, inútil, despreciable {pg 127}

destruir, destruído=> destruir, destruido {pg 160}

Si, Señor, hay=> Sí, Señor, hay {pg 175}

Tráiga V. más agua=> Traiga V. más agua {pg 204}

Atrevesmos los campos.=> Atravesemos los campos. {pg 237}

Atrevesemos el prado.=> Atravesemos el prado. {pg 237}

he is a friend of mind=> he is a friend of mine {pg 239}

All fruit it very early=> All fruit is very early {pg 243}

bound in Russia=> bound in Russian {pg 270}

ejempler muy bonito=> ejemplar muy bonito {pg 272}

En una Joyeria.=> En una Joyería. {pg 274}

Ese diamente=> Ese diamante {pg 274}

Oir hablar español=> Oír hablar español {pg 289}

Es, pues, más útil oir=> Es, pues, más útil oír {pg 289}

your advertisment=> your advertisement {pg 290}

Conozo también=> Conozco también {pg 294}

No he leído los periodicos=> No he leído los periódicos {pg 322}

Vive todavia su padre=> Vive todavía su padre {pg 326}

Es increible=> Es increíble {pg 333}

That does not suprise=> That does not surprise {pg 333}

He is a chip of the old block.=> He is a chip off the old block. {pg
350}

Mucho ruído=> Mucho ruido {pg 350}

quiere oir=> quiere oír {pg 351}

Al freir será el reir=> Al freír será el reír {pg 354}

Preciso es oir=> Preciso es oír {pg 357}

Capítán, patrón.=> Capitán, patrón. {pg 387}

Monthy balance.=> Monthly balance. {pg 388}

Prerogativa, privilegio.=> Prerrogativa, privilegio. {pg 393}

Puerto de mar=> Puerto del mar {pg 399}

Departmento para fumadores.=> Departamento para fumadores. {pg 400}

10 centimos=> 10 céntimos {pg 409}

5 centimos=> 5 céntimos {pg 409}

1 pound (12oz.)=> 1 pound (16 oz.) {pg 411}

       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES:

[1] A throat aspirate.

[2] In this and similar expressions the article is omitted in Spanish;
as: a pound and a half, _libra y media_; a yard and a half, _vara y
media_; eighteen-pence, _chelín y medio_, etc.

[3] In Spain, parliament is called _las Cortes_, and a member of
parliament _un diputado a Cortes_.

[4] See vocabulary of business terms, page 361.

[5] The par value of the pound sterling is 25 pesetas; the rate of
exchange, of course, varies. See page 408.

[6] In Spanish America, _la locomotiva_.

[7] The sizes of collars, gloves, shoes, etc., are indicated in Spanish
in centimetres; thus, size 6 in gloves in English would be size 15 in
Spanish.

[8] Abbreviated to _cien_ when immediately preceding a noun or its
adjective.

[9] The _o_ of _primero_ is dropped before a noun or its adjective.
_Tercero_ and _postrero_ are also so abbreviated, generally.

[10] The noun of nationality may begin with a capital or a small letter.

[11] Or _Antoñito_. Spanish colloquial names are generally formed from
the ordinary Christian names by adding the diminutive termination _ito_,
etc.; as: _Juanito_, Jack (from _Juan_, John), _Anita_, Nancy, etc.
(from _Ana_, _Ann_, etc.). The principal exceptions are given in the
present list.

[12] Tenses not given are conjugated regularly.

[13] Smoking compartments of Spanish trains are marked "Fumadores," but
smoking is allowed in all compartments provided the other passengers do
not object.

[14] _Desayuno_, early breakfast; _almuerzo_, late breakfast. Strictly
speaking "_breakfast_" is "_desayuno_," but when it is a substantial
meal, or a late one, it is generally called "_almuerzo_."

[15] Or _mantequilla_ especially in Spanish America.

[16] Also called _las once_ or _el lunch_. _La merienda_ (generally
translated "lunch"), is a snack taken as a rule between dinner and
supper, usually by children. The Spanish midday meal is generally called
_la comida_, and the evening meal _la cena_.

[17] In Spanish restaurants and cafés the waiter's attention is
attracted by clapping the hands.

[18] Tea as a meal is not a Spanish custom. See note, page 195.

[19] _Buenos días_ is used till noon, _buenas tardes_ from noon till
dusk, and _buenas noches_ afterwards.

[20] The names of the days and months may begin with a capital letter,
as in English.

[21] Given merely as an equivalent. Names of papers are not translated
as a rule.

[22] Or less formally: _Que V. lo pase bien, Caballero_ (_Señora_).

[23] Spaniards generally address their servants in the second person
(tú), but the third person or polite form (V.) is not unusual.

[24] Flower-garden, _jardín_; fruit-garden, _huerto_; vegetable-garden,
_huerta_.

[25] Or, _nunca por mucho trigo es mal año_.

[26] In Spain stamps are sold at tobacconists' (_estancos_), not as in
England, at the Post Office.

[27] See note, page 46.

[28] _Seguro servidor_ (faithful servant).

[29] _Que besa su mano_ (who kisses your hand). This latter formula is
little used in Spanish America, and is often omitted in Spain. Letters
from gentlemen to ladies end with Q.B.S.P., _que besa sus pies_ (who
kisses your feet).

[30] The value of the pound sterling varies, of course, according to the
rate of exchange.

[31] The _10-centimos_ piece is called _perro grande_ or _perro gordo_,
and the _5-centimos_ piece, _perro chico_.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOSSFELD'S SPANISH DIALOGUES, AND IDIOMATIC PHRASES INDISPENSIBLE FOR A RAPID ACQUISITION OF THE SPANISH LANGUAGE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


