The Project Gutenberg eBook of The princess of the atom
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The princess of the atom

Author: Ray Cummings

Release date: March 23, 2025 [eBook #75690]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Avon Publishing Corp, 1929

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCESS OF THE ATOM ***





                       The Princess of the Atom

                            By Ray Cummings

                         AVON PUBLISHING CORP.
                            119 W. 57th St.
                          New York 19, N. Y.

              _Published by arrangement with the Author_

                       THE PRINCESS OF THE ATOM
              COPYRIGHT, 1929, BY THE FRANK A. MUNSEY CO.

                        _AVON REPRINT EDITION_
             COPYRIGHT, 1950, BY AVON PUBLISHING CO., INC.

                          PRINTED IN U. S. A.


           To my son, Hal, and to Russ, my son-in-law--both
                 chemists--this story is appropriately
                     and affectionately dedicated.

       *       *       *       *       *

Her Love Destroyed One World and Threatened Another!

Giants appeared off the coast of New England on the day beautiful
Dianne returned from oblivion. That mysterious beauty had disappeared
from the home of her guardian, Dr. Ferrule, and had been sought in
vain. But with her return, she brought terror to two worlds and an
astounding adventure to the two young men who loved her.

In this breathtaking excursion into atomic mysteries, you will be
enchanted by the unearthly beauty and peril of Dianne, princess of
a world too small to be seen. You will be thrilled by the startling
journey Frank Ferrule makes into infinite smallness to save an
unsuspecting planet. You will be astonished at the terrific fight of
Drake Ferrule against the lustful Togaro, the man who would rule the
universe.

Here is a masterpiece of science-fiction by a dean of fantasy, Ray
Cummings. Unavailable for many years, this unforgettable story of
atomic warfare and invasion from an alien world is the first of the new
series of AVON FANTASY NOVELS, selected by Donald A. Wollheim, editor
of the famous AVON FANTASY READER, and specially designed for the
growing public that has discovered the new thrill of Science-Fiction.

       *       *       *       *       *

                          _Table of Contents_


                     The Coming of the Giants
                     The Mysterious Visitor
                     The Signal Fire
                     The Strange Island
                     Princess of the Atom
                     The Chase into Smallness
                     The Flight in the Cellular Caverns
                     Death of the Giants
                     Tiny Fragment of Rock
                     The White Flag
                     Giant in Ambush
                     The Meeting
                     The Stowaway
                     The Locked Door
                     Togaro at Bay
                     Frank's Plan
                     The Tiny Prowler
                     The Escape of Togaro
                     Night of Turmoil
                     In the Blood Light of Dawn
                     Riding the Giant
                     "Vengeance of Togaro!"
                     Doomed Little Planet!
                     The End of a World
                     In the Campfire Light
                     The Black and White Flags
                     The Fight on the Rock Summit
                     The Return to Earth
                     The Theft of the Rock
                     The World at Bay
                     Togaro Strikes
                     The Fugitives
                     The Combat of Titans
                     Princess of the Cottage




    "_Beautiful with a grace beyond the reach of art._"




                              _Prologue_


I was seventeen years old before I had any idea that there was a
mystery in my family. My name is Frank Ferrule. My mother died when I
was still a child. There was my father; my older brother, Drake; and my
younger sister, Dianne. We had always seemed to me an average little
family group, except for Dianne's beauty. That, in truth, was abnormal
enough. And upon that, I was to learn, the mystery hinged--tragedy it
was for Dianne, striking all unheralded like a bolt from a cloudless
sky.

Our life, up to that August when the sudden, inexplicable tragedy came,
was perfectly prosaic, uneventful, so that I can find little of it to
record here that would be of interest. Father was a consulting chemist.
My brother Drake, six years older than I, grew up to be a stalwart
blond giant of a fellow--a full six feet two--with a lazy, rollicking
good-nature like a huge dog conscious of his own strength. Father often
said that; and called me a terrier. I was always small and slender,
with dark hair, and by nature excitable.

There was nothing unusual, nothing of particular interest about Drake
and me. But Dianne's beauty would have fascinated the world. I can
remember that she had always been beautiful. In the advertisements of
fashion magazines there are drawings of children--ideally beautiful
little girls. Dianne, as a child, was like that, a blue-eyed
flaxen-haired doll.

But soon she began to develop character. At sixteen the doll look was
wholly gone. Her face bore the stamp of her individuality; but it
remained as exquisite, as colorful as a cameo, or like a pastel, so
delicately flawless of feature, so perfect of natural coloring that
the effect was startling. I have heard people say, meeting her, that
she seemed unreal. And certainly, everywhere she went, she attracted
unusual attention.

This tragedy came--the mystery began--one August when Dianne was
sixteen, I seventeen, and Drake twenty-three. We were at our summer
home on the coast of Maine. Father was of a temperament which demanded
a quiet life. I think, too, that with such a girl as Dianne, he found
seclusion an added advantage.

She could so easily have been spoiled; but she was not. A gentle
little thing, sweet in the old-fashioned storied style, with all the
sophistication of her age passing her by untouched. Mischievous she had
always been since childhood, and she was human enough to be thrilled by
the frequent offers of motion-picture tryouts and the like.

Such offers inevitably came. We were not hermits. We spent our winters
in New York City. Quietly, but we had many friends and the fame of
Dianne's beauty spread.

But father kept her unspoiled, and apart from it all.

We often had friends at our summer home; but it chanced that this
particular August there was no one but our family there. I recall the
fateful morning of the fourteenth. There was nothing to mark it from
any other morning--warm and cloudless, with a fresh breeze that rippled
the water of the cove and set the whitecaps running outside.

Father announced that he would be all day at a chemical experiment and
not to disturb him. Drake, Dianne and I decided that we would take the
dory and row out to Bird's Nest Island; fish a little; have a swim and
a campfire lunch. We started soon after breakfast. It was not a long
pull, for the island was only some two miles offshore. We found the sea
outside smooth running, but brisk. The wide bow of the dory lifted and
slapped as we headed into the whitecaps.

Bird's Nest Island had, to my mind, always spelled romance. It was a
tiny, rocky peak alone in the sea, an irregularly round island only
a few hundred acres in extent. The fifty-foot peak was almost in
its center. Gulls often hung around that little naked crag pointing
skyward. A rocky, but gently sloping beach encircled all the island.
There were trees and underbrush; and, queerly enough, a spring of fresh
water.

It was an uninhabited island, with all the romance of Robinson Crusoe
hanging over it. From the rock peak one could stand and see all the
circular island shore and the sea in every direction. As children we
had come here with the grown-ups. We had placed a cairn upon the summit
and erected a signal flag, then, ignoring the obvious shore of the
Maine coast, had built a signal fire and prayed that its smoke might be
seen by some passing ship which would come and rescue us.

We were too old for such fancies now, but the romance clung. We put on
our swimming suits, this August morning, and swam from the lee beach.
There is only one incident of significance for me to record.

Drake was swimming far out with lusty strokes. Dianne and I not so
skillful or daring in the water, were in the shallows of the beach. I
recall that I leaped at her and ducked her. She came up gasping, but
laughing, and made a rush at me. We mingled in a fight, tumbling each
other into the water.

I had always been Dianne's favorite. We were nearer an age, and Drake,
when in his 'teens, had looked down upon us as mere children. We
wrestled now in the water; and I remember that I found myself clinging
to Dianne's hair, up by her forehead.

"Frank, stop that! Let me go!"

The frightened vehemence of her tone made me loose her at once.

"What's the matter?"

"You hurt me."

"Shucks."

A girl growing up with two older brothers gets used to rough treatment.
It was not like Dianne to call quits.

"You did hurt me."

"Did I? Sorry, Dianne. Come on, let's swim then. Look where Drake is."

The incident left me puzzled. Dianne had done that before. She did not
like her hair touched. It grew down at the center of her forehead in a
queer little peak, and she wore it parted far to one side.

Children are not curious about such things, but I was old enough now to
wonder why Dianne was annoyed when her hair there was touched.

Drake came ashore, and he and I wandered off to dress. Then we called
to Dianne. We had left her only a couple of hundred feet away.

I called, "Oh Dianne, hurry it up. You going to take all day?"

She did not answer. We called again. Drake said, "She's spoofing us.
Hiding."

We ran back to where we had left her. The little pile of her clothes
lay there untouched.

"Dianne!" Our shouts echoed over the island, but there was no answer.

"Find her in two minutes," said Drake. He shouted, "Watch out, Dianne,
we're coming! I'll run around the beach first, Frank. You climb up to
the rock--see everything from there--"

I went up to the peak, where I could see all the beach. Our dory was
undisturbed, and I could see no sign of a boat leaving the island, or
anywhere near it. I saw Drake sprinting around the beach, then plunging
off among the trees. I could see his figure occasionally. He called up,

"See her, Frank?"

"No!"

Fear struck us then. We searched, at first laughingly, then with stark
horror overwhelming us. The little island was all too easy to search.
There were no caves, no cliff over which she could have fallen. We had
seen all the beach and the near-by water within a few moments after her
disappearance. Surely there had not been time for her to swim out and
be drowned. She was a fair swimmer, and cautious for all her youth. And
even if she had gone back in the water and got into distress, we were
so close we could have heard at once any call she made.

But she was gone. Vanished. No boat had landed that could have taken
her. That was impossible without our seeing it over that reach of empty
sea.

I recall our frantic search. Then at last Drake and I alone frantically
rowed back home to tell father. It was like a dream of horror. Father's
white, solemn face. He never once reproached Drake or me. He telephoned
the village. Then came another trip to the island in a launch with
grave-faced men.

But Dianne was never found. We brought back her clothes that lay
untouched there by the underbrush at the beach. I could not look at
them, but went into my bedroom and lay on the bed and sobbed. It was
the first tragedy that life had brought me.

Night had fallen when Drake came to me. He leaned over me
sympathetically.

"Take it easy, kid." His own face was white and drawn; he loved Dianne
as much as I did, but he was older, more stoical. "Father wants to see
us, Frank. Get hold of yourself." His arm went around my shoulder and I
huddled against him, "Take it easy--wash your face and come on down."

It was about Dianne--father had something to tell us. We faced him in
the living room. He closed its doors.

"Sit down, lads."

It may have been in Drake's thoughts, certainly it was in mine, that
now father was about to blame us. I had felt, those hours sobbing on
the bed, that somehow I was to blame. That incident in the water when
I had annoyed Dianne about her hair--wild thoughts swept me that I had
annoyed her and she had committed suicide. I had already told father
about it; told him in the launch. He had listened and waved it away.

He sat facing us now, a slender, solemn man of fifty, with iron-gray
hair, and thin, studious face. His eyes behind his big horn-rimmed
spectacles seemed unnaturally bright, but gentle.

He said, "Don't look at me like that, lads--I've no intention of
reproaching you."

And then he told us, in a burst, without preface, what we had never
suspected.

"You were about two years old, Frank--and you, Drake, about eight. It
was the year before your mother died. She and I went to Bird's Nest
Island, leaving you children at home."

This same island!

"A summer day," he said, "just about like this. We went for a
picnic--just as you did today. It was fifteen years ago. We were
wandering about the little island--your mother and I. We heard a
wailing cry, an infant's. In a thicket we found a little girl baby.
Unharmed. An infant, about a year old, who evidently had been asleep
and now had awakened and was crying. There was no boat in sight about
this island. We concluded that some one had been there, abandoned the
baby and departed. We took the baby home. No one ever came to claim
her. It was Dianne."

Dianne not our blood sister? A foundling! It struck us amazed.

Father went on gently, "We thought it best, your mother and I, not to
tell you children. It would not have been fair to Dianne. There would
come a time when you should know, of course--perhaps I should have told
you before this--and I don't know, perhaps it was wrong of me to let
you go back to that island. But I suppose that's foolish!"

His voice drifted away with his thoughts. Nothing occurred to Drake
and me to say; we sat dumbly staring at each other.

Father rose presently and unlocked a drawer of his desk. "I brought
this down to show you. There was nothing about the infant to give a
clew to its identity. Just the baby lying there, clad in a single
garment. This."

He held out a tiny infant robe. Long-sleeved, and with a tiny hood.
Strange-looking thing! Even as a lad of seventeen I was at once aware
of its strangeness. A gossamer fabric like nothing I had ever seen
before. A fabric golden as though its threads were pale spun gold.
Or as though it might have been woven of fairy threads of golden
hair--like Dianne's.

"Just that robe," he said sadly. "What sort of material it is, no one
can say." He took it from us gently and replaced it in the drawer. "And
there was one other thing. You, Frank, spoke of Dianne being sensitive
about the hair at her forehead. That little peak where the hair grew
low, you remember? There was a scar on her forehead. Not exactly a
scar--a queer crescent patch of skin. It seemed not white, but almost
like the sheen of silver. It looked--well, something like a crescent
moon. We hated publicity, your mother and I. We kept the finding of the
baby reasonably quiet. We had a medical specialist examine the child. A
normal girl baby, promising extreme beauty of body and feature. But the
crescent-moon scar was an enigma--the doctor had never seen or heard of
anything like it.

"So we called the baby Dianne. Your mother named her that. The
crescent, there on her forehead, was really very beautiful when one got
used to it. But too unusual. Too--mysterious. And so we trained her
hair to cover it up; and I--I taught her--well, perhaps I taught her to
be ashamed of it. Or at least, never to mention it to any one--and so
she was sensitive about it as though it were a secret blemish to her
beauty."

I need not detail that evening with father. But there was one thing he
said that I never forgot. He said it half to himself, "Dianne was so
abnormally beautiful, and that strange golden dress and the crescent
silver scar--I have wondered so many times, all these years, wondered
if she were just exactly human like the rest of us." He was sorry at
once that he had said it, and he would never explain.

This day that we lost Dianne was five years before the coming of the
giants.




                               CHAPTER I

                      _The Coming of the Giants_


The first of the giants was reported by a small steamship out of
Halifax, bound for Portland. The ship had rounded Cape Sable, Nova
Scotia, during the night of March 20th. The sea was stormy; the night
overcast with almost a gale from the north. The ship's lookout saw what
at first looked like a huge dark rock looming out of the ocean where no
rock should have been. It was well inshore from the ship; and though it
was only a few miles away, it was not seen clearly.

The ship continued on her course. An hour later, the full moon broke
through a rift in the clouds, painting the sullen sea with silver.
To the north, where the southern headlands of the land were barely
visible, a giant human figure was seen standing in the ocean. Every
one on the ship saw it clearly. Incredible as the vision of a fabled
sea monster, yet there it was, unmistakable, frightening--it threw the
ship's company into a panic of terror.

The thing seemed human. The giant figure of a man. He stood waist-deep
in the ocean with the waves beating against his naked chest. How deep
the water was, the master of the ship could not say. Ten fathoms
perhaps, in the shallows where the giant stood--sixty feet; and his
torso towered another sixty above the surface. He stood watching the
ship. Then, as it passed, he followed it; wading slowly along to keep
abreast of it as doubtless he had been doing for an hour past. In the
moonlight, details were plain. A bullet-headed giant. Some said that
they could see his features--human of cast, but brutish.

The figure kept its distance, regarding the ship, but making no effort
to approach. The vessel turned in a moment off its course, and fled
south. The moon was presently obscured. They saw no more of the giant.

This steamship carried wireless. But the master could see no rational
way of sending such a wild report. But when hours later, the vessel
docked in Portland, the tale was given out.

In these days of skeptical enlightened civilization one cannot claim
to have seen a sea serpent and expect anything but laughter. And this
was even more incredible. The ship's commander, within a few hours,
even doubted the evidence of his own senses. But from the sailors the
tale leaked out. And a whole ship's company cannot be insane, or all
similarly drunk at once.

The newspapers caught at it, and spread it jocularly until the
officials of the freight line cursed their captain and all the crew of
the ship for arousing such ridicule.

But still there was some corroboration. From a village near Cape Sable
came the report that a giant man had been seen wading in the ocean,
seen by a few people during a brief period of moonlight, and then was
gone.

Where the figure came from, or where it went, none could say. It was
seen just this one night. The tale went around the world and caused a
smile, and in a few days was forgotten.

That was the first of the giants.

I was at this time a pilot in the International Mail Service, flying
a local plane from Boston up the coast to St. John, daytimes. Up one
day with several stops along the route; and back the next day; and
then a day off duty. Drake had become father's assistant. They had a
laboratory in New York City, and were living now in our Westchester
home. Our home on the Maine shore was closed for the winter.

Once a week I went to New York to be with father and Drake. I got there
the day the giant was reported. It was of particular interest to me,
since it was not far from my flying route.

Father said, "You keep your eyes open, Frank. And look here, if you see
anything--don't report it at once. Telephone me."

He was so solemn that I laughed. And Drake was solemn, too.

I demanded, "I say, you two--you don't believe this fool thing, do you?"

"Perhaps," said Drake.

I think that even then they had some vague idea of what it might mean.
I thought the yarn was absurd; still less could I have imagined our own
connection with it. Never once did I link it with Dianne. It was nearly
five years now since that day she had vanished.

I made my next northward flight with no sign of a giant. Nor did I see
anything unusual upon the return. In a few days more, like the rest of
the world, I had lost interest.

Then one day near the end of March when I was off duty in Boston,
another giant was reported. It had been seen the preceding night.
A giant man--fifty feet tall, or three hundred, according to the
differing, confused versions. The figure had appeared in the ocean,
possibly near the mouth of the Penobscot River in northern Maine.
Several coast villages and several ships reported seeing the figure,
wading north a mile offshore. It was reported almost all the way to the
Bay of Fundy. And then it vanished.

This was too obvious for disbelief. No damage had been done. The thing
apparently had encountered no ships; it had nowhere come ashore. But
the sea was calm this night; the waves of the wading figure had rolled
in and pounded the coast to give tangible evidence that the thing was
no vision.

The world was more than interested this time. There were near-panics
in Boston that day--an exodus of people leaving the city by rail and
by airplanes. Several of the local ships from New York to Boston
canceled their sailings. People began leaving Cape Cod. There was
disorganization, almost a flight from all the cities and villages up
the coast.

This was far different from some understood danger. A hurricane, a
volcano, an earthquake--people will often face them with a stoicism
amounting to foolhardiness, rather than abandon their homes. But
this was the unknown, the supernatural. A gruesome horror. Within a
day military law was declared all up the Maine coast. Troops were
patrolling the area, and the people were being urged to leave.

My chief sent for me at field headquarters. My mate was there; and the
two alternate pilots of the route.

"We've discontinued temporarily," he told us. He turned to me as the
senior pilot. "Ferrule, the government wants this area patrolled by
plane at night. Boston to the New Brunswick border, to connect with
Canadian patrol planes. You and Jones want to tackle it?"

We did, of course. We were dispatched that same night--one of six or
eight planes flying independently of one another. We left Boston about
ten that evening, I and my relief pilot, Bob Jones; and we carried a
newly installed code radio with a fellow named Green to operate it.

It is a run of about three hundred miles from Boston, up the crescent
curve of coast to the Canadian border. Our orders were to fly at about
a thousand feet of altitude, keeping a mile or so offshore. If we saw
one of these giants we were to follow it, keep it in sight, and try
to determine where it went. We were to report at once by radio. A
battleship had already been ordered north; it was to remain in Cape
Cod waters, waiting further developments.

The night was calm and starlit. An hour passed. Then two hours. We saw
nothing unusual. We were up around the Penobscot now.

Jones, at my elbow, murmured, "One was seen here, Frank. That last
one--"

A plane came by, flying south. Another patrol doubtless. We felt that
no giant could be ahead of us or this other plane would have seen him;
stopped and stayed with him.

The flattened moon came up out of the sea to the east. It was golden at
first, laying a broad golden path on the water.

We passed over the many islands. We saw a ship or two--and occasionally
a plane.

And then we saw the giant! The actual sight of him, even fortified by
what I expected, was a shock of horror.

Jones murmured, "Good God!" He gripped my arm impulsively, but I shook
him off.

"Don't do that, you fool!"

"Look at him, Frank!" Bob cried then.

He was no more than a mile or so ahead. He stood at the entrance to a
cove. A rocky headland perhaps a hundred feet high was beside him; and
he stood with a hand resting against it as though to steady himself.
The ocean surface lapped at his knees.

To the right, a mile or so offshore, was the tiny dark blob of an
island. Bird's Nest Island! I realized it suddenly. And this was our
cove. Our summer home was set in the trees only a few hundred yards
back from where the giant was standing.

Green's radio was sending the news. He hunched down, intent at his
work. Jones was shaking beside me.

"Lower, Frank! Get down near him!"

We spiraled down. The moonlight was on him, a hundred-foot figure of a
man, naked from the waist up. He had pale hair, close cut, on a round
head.

"Frank, look at the people!"

A group of tiny black figures was on the cliff, standing in fascinated
horror. The giant had not moved; and then with a swift step and a
flip of his arm he reached back over the cliff. The tiny figures were
scattered. In a patch of moonlit rock two of them lay dead.

We passed only a few hundred feet above the giant. He looked up as
though confused or annoyed at the sound of our motors.

Green cautioned me: "Not too close, Frank! If he ever reached--"

That giant hand could have knocked us down into the sea as though we
had been a tiny humming insect.

We circled, zoomed up a trifle, and came back. The news had spread.
There were two other planes here with us now. A confusion was on shore.
We could see, far back, figures and vehicles moving in the moonlight.
And lights. And far out to sea, there were the lights of a ship.

We passed again over the giant. Another plane arrived. Four of us,
buzzing like insects over the monstrous figure. It turned suddenly and
began wading out to sea.

Jones cried: "Look! He's smaller! By George, he is smaller!"

The figure did seem less gigantic. Or perhaps it was the deeper water
around him. Then suddenly he sank prone and was swimming. The sea was
lashed white with his strokes. Swimming for Bird's Nest Island? It
seemed so.

"Lower, Frank! Take us down!"

"Not too close," cautioned Green, for fear he'd stand up again suddenly.

We swept under another plane. The swimming giant flung up an arm; a
surge of the water mounted like a geyser in the moonlight. His flashing
arms and the black blob of his head were visible. He was halfway to the
island. Was he still smaller now?

Then suddenly he dived. The ocean closed over him. The waves he had
made rolled away. The surface was calm, unbroken. We waited. Minutes.
He did not come up.

The other planes with us swept back and forth, dangerously close to
the surface at times. But the giant was gone. We waited half an hour.
We crossed over Bird's Nest Island several times. Its tiny rocky peak
stood naked in the brilliant moonlight; its trees and shrubbery were
deep green; its beach shone clear with the moonlight on it and the calm
sea rolling up.

No sign of the giant. And then we were ordered to return to Boston. We
turned south.

We were an hour on our southern flight when Green picked up our call. A
message for me.

"Your father, Ferrule--he's sent word through headquarters. We're
ordered to land at Bennett Field, New York, so you can go to
your father and your brother Drake at once." He added: "The exact
message--personal, you'll probably understand it--your father says tell
you to come at once. He has heard from Dianne."




                              CHAPTER II

                       _The Mysterious Visitor_


This same night that I was flying the patrol, father and Drake spent at
our home in a small Westchester town near New York. They knew in what
I was engaged. They were frequently connected by telephone with the
official Boston station to which Green was making our radio reports.

Our Westchester home was an unpretentious cottage, set on a quiet
street near the edge of the village. We kept only one servant. She was
away this night; Drake and father were alone in the house.

There came, just before midnight, a thumping on the front porch door.

They looked up, startled. The thump was repeated. Some one at the front
door, demanding admittance.

"Well," said Drake, "it's a wonder they wouldn't ring the bell! I'll
go, father."

We had an electric front doorbell, with the button prominently
displayed. And also, on the door for ornament, an old-fashioned
knocker. This summons was not even a knock; a thump, as though some one
were pounding with the flat of his fist. It began again and continued.

"What the deuce?" Drake muttered. He lighted the hall light; father
followed him. Drake, with his six feet two inches of brawn, was, at the
age of twenty-eight, afraid of no man. But a vague thrill of fear shot
through him nevertheless as he went to the door and jerked it open.

A man stood there; a tall, bulky figure, though not so tall as Drake--a
man in a long, dark overcoat, with a black felt hat pulled down over
his eyes. At first glance he was a rough-looking customer.

"What do you want?" Drake demanded. "We've got a doorbell."

"Does it--is Dr. Ferrule who lives here?" A soft voice; the queer
accent of a foreigner. But Drake could not place the nationality; the
voice and broken accent were like nothing he had ever heard before. The
light fell on the man's face, heavy-jawed, hairless. A man of perhaps
thirty-five.

"Yes," said Drake. "Dr. Ferrule is here." Father was behind him. "For
you, father."

The man stood at the threshold. "Then you are Drake Ferrule? Is that
true?"

Father advanced. "Come in. What is it? You want to see me? I am Dr.
Ferrule."

The man came in. Though the door opening was two feet higher than his
head, nevertheless he stooped as he passed it. He stood in the hall.

"Dr. Ferrule, I would like to speak to you--and to this your son. This
is Drake?"

Drake said impatiently: "That's my name. Who are you? What do you want?"

The visitor addressed father. "My name? You never heard it. My
business? You had a daughter--"

That electrified them. Drake caught father's warning glance and
remained silent. Father was trembling. "My daughter--Dianne?"

"Yes, Dianne."

"Come in," said father. He led the man to the library. Drake followed
behind, watchfully. He somehow sensed that this mysterious visitor was
no friend. An antagonist of some sort. In the library the fellow stood
with his hat on. He pushed back its brim as though it annoyed him. He
stood ill at ease; his gaze roved the room. To Drake, watching him
closely, it seemed that he was somehow expectant; and tense, afraid
perhaps of something which might at any moment occur.

"Sit down," said father.

He was more than mysterious, this visitor. Weird. He stood carefully
watching father sit down. Then he drew a chair forward and awkwardly
sat upon it. As though he had never seen a chair before. The thought
flashed to Drake.

"Well?" said father.

There was a brief silence. Drake remained standing. Father, by
temperament nervous, was visibly trembling. But he was no fool; he was
very cautious, alert.

"Well, what is it? About my daughter Dianne."

"Yes. She--you have not seen her for many years?"

"No."

"Not even heard from her?"

"No. Why?"

It seemed to have been an important question to the visitor. The shadow
of a triumphant smile came to his face. He said: "When you last saw
her--I understand that you lived on the Maine coast, Dr. Ferrule. But I
find you here now in New York--"

"Who the devil are you?" Drake put in.

"Wait, Drake! We live in Maine in the summer," said father. "What is it
you have to tell me?"

"I came," he said, "to warn you." The fellow's voice and words, for
all his awkward manner, were perfectly composed. He had, even, a queer
sort of dominance, as though in his own environment he were accustomed
to command. His hat seemed to continue to annoy him. He took it off.
He had a massive bullet head, with pale-gold hair close-clipped.
Slate-blue eyes; a high-bridged nose. A solidly square chin. Strange,
massive face! Queerly forceful, and, Drake thought, queerly evil. The
thin lips curved into a smile.

"I came," he repeated, "to warn you. I hear there are giants up near
your summer home."

Father said, more vehemently than he had spoken before: "What about
them? Do you know where they come from? Look here, hadn't you better
tell us who you are? You act very strange."

The man abruptly stood up. "I will go now."

It was too much for Drake. "The hell you will! Not till you've told us
your business! You come here, question us, and go--"

He seemed not disturbed by Drake's attack. "You excite yourself, young
fellow. Dr. Ferrule, I would suggest it, you stay away from your house
up there in Maine."

"Thank you," said father, with his quiet irony. "Drake, wait a minute!"

"Stay away because--there might be danger there for you."

"From what?" Drake demanded.

"From the giants."

"What about them? You know anything about them?"

He gestured deprecatingly. "No more than you. But I would say it, they
must be dangerous."

The fellow was trying to withdraw. He moved toward the door. Whatever
the purpose of his visit, he seemed to have accomplished it.

Father and Drake followed him. At the library doorway instinctively he
stooped again. He had put on his hat. Drake noticed that he had it on
backward.

In the hall father said: "Is this all you've got to say?"

"Yes."

"You--you mentioned my daughter."

He did not answer. He waited until the front door of the house was
open. He kept away from Drake. Then he said abruptly: "You will never
see Dianne again. Forget her."

He half ran, half leaped across the porch; leaped its steps, and darted
away.

Drake started in pursuit, but father called him back.

The running figure was in a moment lost in the shadows of the dark
street.




                              CHAPTER III

                           _The Signal Fire_


Some six hours later, in the early morning, I arrived. Father and Drake
had not been to bed. They described the mysterious midnight visitor. I
could make little of it, save that Dianne was alive. Had this fellow
abducted her? Was he holding her? Had he come to sound out whether
father would pay a ransom?

Father waved away my theories. He was visibly shaken. There was one
thing upon which he and Drake were agreed. The visitor had been wholly
strange. Something about him almost uncanny.

Father said slowly: "We don't know what it means. That fellow last
night--he came, we think, just to find out if Dianne were with us.
Something he said, or the way he said it, gave us that impression. It
seems possible that he knew Dianne is trying to rejoin us. It may be
that he is an enemy of Dianne's. I think--wherever Dianne is--she may
be trying to get to us. We must help her do that."

"But how?" I demanded.

Drake said: "She might try to get back to our place, up there in Maine.
We feel we should be there now, Frank. That fellow last night--damn
fool!--thought he could keep us from going there by warning us away!"

"But who was he?" I insisted. My mind was groping with vague
ideas--like father's and Drake's perhaps; ideas too fantastic for
discussion. "What has your visitor got to do with us? Or Dianne? Or
these giants? I don't see the connection, but there is one, that's
obvious."

Father said very slowly: "You, Frank, seemed to think that giant you
saw last night was changing size--dwindling. Perhaps while he was under
the water he grew so small that when he came up you did not see him.
Don't ask us what it means! We don't know. But I really think that
fellow who called upon Drake and me last night was one of the giants!"

We left New York that same morning in an official plane which dropped
us in the afternoon near our home in Maine. What father told the
authorities I do not know. He said he told them as little as possible.
Whatever our connection with this affair, for Dianne's sake it seemed
best not to make it public. But father got me leave of absence from my
flying duties, and secured us an official plane, and a permit for us
to live in our Maine home, within the threatened area which now was
completely under military rule.

It was mid-afternoon when by automobile we reached our house. We had
been stopped half a dozen times by State troops patrolling all the
roads leading to the coast. One officer chanced to know father.

"It's risky, Dr. Ferrule. You know what you're doing, of course. But
down there--your isolated house right on the shore--"

"We know what we're doing," said father.

I put in: "Shucks, there's no danger. Might never have another giant
appear."

The town of Elton, two miles from our home, looked as though it were
in a state of siege. Half its people had fled. Troops patrolled the
streets. Many of the houses were closed and barred--as though that
would help against a hundred-foot giant! The shops were nearly all
closed; but we located several of the owners and loaded our car with
provisions.

On arriving, father went to bed. He was never in robust health, and the
nervous excitement of all this and his loss of sleep had about done
him up. He was too tired to eat the meal which Drake and I hastily
prepared. But he was a fighter, every inch of him. He lay down, fully
dressed, with an automatic beside his pillow.

"You lads can stand guard--suit yourselves--only don't both sleep at
once. Call me if anything unusual happens."

Drake and I sat on guard. We were neither of us sleepy. It seemed as
though there were a thousand things we wanted to talk about, but it was
all so intangible. We were in what undoubtedly was the heart of the
threatened area. The world believed that; and no one knew it better
than ourselves.

We had had the latest official reports. No other giant was seen. There
had been several people killed by a sweep of the giant's arm last
night, quite near here on the cliff top. Official searching parties had
been over every inch of Bird's Nest Island and all the shore in this
vicinity. Nothing unusual was found. They had even dragged the water
between here and the island, thinking perhaps the giant's body might
have sunk.

There were other reports which now had come in. Gruesome things! In the
back country near here a farmer had been found dead a few nights ago,
and all his clothes stolen. There were several similar incidents.

At sunset a destroyer steamed past, headed north on patrol. There were
often airplanes passing overhead. And out at sea there was a smudge
which we thought might be a battleship.

With darkness came a sense of loneliness--the feeling of our isolation
here in this house set close against the coast. We were in danger here,
but not altogether foolhardy. We had rifles and several automatics. And
the telephone would at any time bring us help from the troops stationed
in the near-by village.

To fight what? It would all be so useless against a hundred-foot giant!

The vigil grew irksome. Would Dianne come? How? When? Tonight?
Tomorrow? A week or a month from now--or never? They were such futile
questions. And it seemed, as we sat there on guard, that we might be
menaced not only by giants. There was father's midnight visitor in New
York, just last night. Was he--or others like him--lurking about our
place here? We sat, often straining our ears for every sound outside
the house.

Father slept soundly. The evening passed. It was a dark night; a few
moving lights out at sea. We saw nothing unusual, heard nothing.

Midnight came. "You better go to sleep," Drake said, when we had
rustled up another meal. "I'll sit here till dawn, then call you.
We'll have to get some regular schedule."

Sleep was a long time coming. Then I slept dreamlessly, to be awakened
by Drake pulling at me.

"It will soon be daylight, Frank."

I leaped up. "Nothing happened?"

"No."

"How's father?"

"All right. Still pounding it out. He was awake with me for an hour
or two. Then I made him go back. The fire's going in the living room,
Frank. There's a pot of coffee on the hearth if you want it. Here, want
this automatic?"

"No. I've got mine."

He lay down with his weapon beside him, and I left him. I went out into
the living room. Its oil lamp was burning. In the big open fireplace
a log fire was going with a pot of coffee on the hearth. I had my
automatic in my pocket; beside the hearth three loaded rifles and a
shotgun were standing.

Through the windows to the east I could see that the stars were paling.

       *       *       *       *       *

The dawn came. The room brightened with its flat light. I put out the
lamp. The fire burned low.

It was now broad daylight. A clear, crisp morning. Silent and still;
not a breath of wind. Drake had been asleep perhaps two hours. I went
again to the veranda. There were no planes, no boats in sight, except
out at sea where the warship still hovered.

Bird's Nest Island stood clear in the morning sunlight. From the island
a wisp of smoke was rising. Some one there--a camp fire. Soldiers,
perhaps.

I stood gazing. The smoke rose in a thin, dark wisp, straight up into
the still air. Then suddenly the column broke. The smoke was checked.
And in a moment it came again. A dark, round puff of it rising. Then
another puff. And others. As though a blanket were being held over a
smoking fire, to catch the smoke, releasing it in puffs.

A stream of them now. Two large ones. Three, smaller. Two large ones
again.

A signal fire? But it was not only that thought which made my heart
pound. I recognized the signal! My mind flung back to childhood days.
Myself, Dianne and Drake. Fanciful children out on this same island;
building a camp fire; making the smoke signals as we thought Robinson
Crusoe might have done. Two large puffs; then three smaller. This was
our childish signal, out there now!




                              CHAPTER IV

                         _The Strange Island_


"Drake! Wake up!"

I routed him out hastily. The signal was still showing. Drake
remembered it, just as I did. We watched it; and after a moment it
ceased. The wisp of smoke went up unbroken; and then presently it
dissipated and vanished.

We stared at each other.

"You think it's Dianne?" I asked.

"Yes. It might be." He was confused. "I don't know what to think,
Frank. We must go there--get over there quickly as we can--see what it
means."

"Yes," I agreed. "I wonder if our dory is down at the boathouse. You
mean, row over? I don't think father will want to say anything at the
village; get a launch? Do you?"

"No." We both felt, as we knew father did, a reticence against
taking the authorities into our confidence. If Dianne came--to have
an official investigation of her, with all the publicity--it was
unthinkable.

"Let's see about the dory," Drake suggested.

"Shall we wake father up?"

"Let's see about the dory first."

We found the dory safe in the boathouse.

We decided to start at once. A row of half an hour. We went to awaken
father.

"Think he'll want to come with us, Drake?"

"He might--I hope he'll stay here. This might just be a
coincidence--not Dianne. We should not all leave here at once, Frank."

"Why not?"

He stopped and faced me. "Because suppose she--appeared while we were
gone?"

Appeared? He said it with a queer hitch in his voice. As though Dianne
might materialize from nothing into solidity before us! Yet we both
felt like that. This whole affair seemed supernatural.

"Yes," I said. "That's true."

And father felt the same. He decided to stay on guard. He made us take
two automatics, and a rifle in the bottom of the dory. He was refreshed
from his sleep. Alert and vigorous.

"I'll be all right, lads." He followed us down to the boathouse. He was
white and grim as he said, "I need not tell you to be cautious. Come
back quickly as you can."

We launched the dory and headed into the cove. He called, "If I don't
see you starting back in two hours I'll bring a launch after you."

Drake and I hardly spoke during the trip. The rifle lay at Drake's
feet; we had our automatics strapped to our belts. We stripped
off our coats for the work of rowing. In the stern we had other
coats--oilskins, which always were kept in the dory.

We approached the island. Drake eased up. "Wait a minute--let's see if
anybody shows."

The smoke had long since vanished. We could not be sure at what part of
the island the fire had been. There was no sign of it now. The little
island stood green in the morning sunlight, with the peak of rock
looming at its center. The beach on this side was empty; there was no
evidence of any living thing there, save a few gulls lazily circling
overhead.

We were armed, and this was broad daylight. But the thought of that
strange midnight visitor swept me. I know Drake felt the same as we
pulled up in the sunlight of the island beach. We were not afraid of
anything human.

Drake carried the rifle. I had my automatic out. We started off down
the silent beach. Rounded its end. All empty. We kept near the water,
away from the trees and underbrush.

No sign of anything. Drake whispered. "Let's cut straight across. Then
up to the rock. Look for the fire embers."

He led us, with the rifle in the hollow of his arm. We walked slowly,
cautiously through the trees as though stalking some hidden animal.

But there seemed no one on the island.

Drake called suddenly, "Dianne! Oh, Dianne!"

It startled me; it echoed through the silent trees. We stood listening.

Nothing.

We went on again. We came to the opposite beach. Drake whispered, "The
fire must have been to the south."

We went that way. Back from the shore, some fifty feet from the beach
we came upon the embers of a small fire. They were still faintly
smoking.

No one here. We stood in this little glade, our gazes roving.

Nothing here. Just a few embers and half-burned sticks. I bent down.

"Water was thrown on the fire to put it out," I said softly. "These
sticks are wet."

I was on one knee. My heart leaped into my throat. There was a patch
of grass and ferns near me. Something stirred in them. A bird moving
through the grass? But it was not that. I stared.

A fern not much higher than my ankle moved and bent aside.

My breath stopped. I stared, unbelieving. And Drake saw it. He muttered
something and took a backward step.

The fern leaf moved further. A tiny figure, no taller than the blades
of grass around it, was disclosed. A human figure an inch or so high!

And there were others, lurking in the grass. One came out. The figure
of a woman the height of my finger. A woman with long golden robe.
Pale-gold hair dangling. The tiny face stared up at me, only a few feet
away as I knelt. A face the size of my finger nail! The sunlight fell
on it. A girl, humanly beautiful. Small and colorful, this living face,
as a miniature painted on ivory.

And I recognized it. I gasped. "Dianne, it's you!"




                               CHAPTER V

                        _Princess of the Atom_


Drake and I were transfixed; amazed, doubting the evidence of our
senses. Yet there was Dianne at our feet. She stood with a hand
holding a fern stalk. Her little face was smiling. I heard a voice, of
microscopic smallness, but clear. Dianne's voice; her familiar accents.

"You came, Frank. I--we've been waiting."

I became aware that Drake had taken a step or two forward. The little
figures in the grass scattered. Dianne called up sharply, "Careful,
Drake! Don't step on us! Stand quiet! In a moment I'll be larger."

She turned and ran into the grass. Its blades were no higher than the
length of my hand, but as though they were a jungle of huge green
stalks they sheltered the small human figures. Half a dozen men, and
one other girl, like Dianne, but with a robe of pale silvery white.

The figures clustered together. We could hear their faint voices. Words
in a language unintelligible. Then the two girls drew apart. The men
moved away. Hiding, watching from the concealing grass.

Amazing sight! Inconceivable shock to our normal senses! Before our
eyes, Dianne and this other girl were becoming larger. A visible
change. In a moment they were above the grass. They moved away from
it. They bent the ferns aside. Dianne trampled one now. They came out
into the little open patch of rock and pebbles where Drake and I were
standing by the embers of the camp fire. Already they were as tall as
our knees.

Dianne's voice, now more familiar than ever, said, "Don't look like
that! Move back. Don't stand so close to us!"

For a moment neither Drake nor I spoke. A new realization of this thing
swept me. The menacing giants along the coast had disappeared because
they had become small. I had already contemplated that. But I had
envisaged them only as small as myself. Like the midnight visitor who
had called upon Drake and father. Yet here were humans still smaller.

And I realized then that what we had called a giant could be lurking
here upon this island now. Any of these little patches of grass would
shelter him, and a thousand like him.

Dianne had been furtive with her smoke signal to us. She had made it;
and then had grown small with her companions, to hide in the grass and
await our coming. She was so obviously furtive! As tall as my waist
now, she gazed around anxiously as though, with her greater height than
before, she might now discern some near-by enemy.

The girl with her seemed equally apprehensive. An air of haste
enveloped them both.

And I saw now that the tiny figures of the men in the grass were
spreading out and vanishing. Or searching? Or guarding? Their smallness
making it possible for them to seek out any lurking tiny enemies which
to us in our gigantic size could never be found.

A minute or two only while my thoughts roved and I clung to Drake and
stared at Dianne and this strange girl growing large before us; Dianne,
every minute as she neared what to me was her normal size, becoming
more familiar of aspect.

The same Dianne--our little sister! Yet how different! The long golden
robe was of that same strange fabric as the infant dress father had
shown us in which she had been found. Her pale-gold hair flowed free to
her waist. But it did not come down into a peak on her forehead now.
It was drawn back; and there on her forehead was the silver crescent
patch. It seemed to glow. Unnatural. Uncanny. Yet it was a thing
beautiful. It blended with her beauty. And it made her seem queerly
regal.

She said abruptly, "Ahlma--enough!"

The hand of each of the girls went suddenly to their mouths. They
reeled, clutching at each other; and Drake and I, with recovered wits,
moved to aid them. But they steadied. They smiled. And they had stopped
growing. Dianne, about as tall as I had always remembered her; this
other girl, whom she had called Ahlma, a trifle taller; and it seemed,
perhaps, a year or two older. A girl singularly beautiful in Dianne's
own fashion. Golden hair like Dianne's. And a crescent on her forehead.
But it seemed a paler crescent than Dianne's.

Drake stammered, "Why, Dianne!"

I think he had said that and nothing else half a dozen times before.

The girls were still furtive, apprehensive. Dianne said hurriedly,
"Don't question now, Drake. Frank, dear--stop looking at me like that!
Your boat is here?"

I said, "Yes, Dianne."

"This is Ahlma. My servant and my friend. Is father all right, Frank?"

"Yes."

"I want to get to him. Take us to the boat. Have you something you can
cover us with?"

Her hand gripped my arm. It strangely reassured me to feel her human
grip. Drake reached out hesitantly and touched her. And she laughed and
kissed us both. Our same human, beautiful little Dianne.

"Ahlma, these all my life were my brothers."

"We have coats in the boat," I said.

"Is father here? At the house here?"

"Yes," said Drake. "Come."

We started with them for the boat.

"You're afraid," said Drake. "You have enemies here? These giants?"

"But I can't tell you now! Yes, enemies. They know what I am trying to
do. They want to stop me. One of them, the leader--we call him Togaro--"

She gazed around us. "He is here, I think. He and a party of his men.
Drake, you can't realize the jungle deeps of this vast island when you
are small! Deserts of rock--vast caverns--it's so different when you
are small! I'm afraid of him--I want to get to father."

We came to the beach. She added, "I would tell you now what I have come
for. But he might be here at our feet. He knows, I think, that I have
come to join you."

The midnight visitor. Was he this Togaro?

"Get in," said Drake. He stared at the girl in the white robe. He said
to her, "This thing is so inconceivably strange to us--we don't know
what to say--we--am I to call you Ahlma?"

She met his gaze and smiled; and it seemed that a faint wave of color
suffused her neck and face. She said, with a queer accent. "Yes, I am
Ahlma. You are Drake--and you are Frank. I have heard very much from
Dianne about you."

Her voice gave Drake a startled realization. Her accent was
indescribable. But Drake recognized it! Unmistakably the accent of the
midnight visitor.

The girls sat in the stern of the dory. We covered them with the
oilskins so that any one observing us would see nothing unusual about
them.

They had searched and made us search the boat. There was no human thing
aboard it save ourselves. No figure even the size of our finger could
have lurked there and escaped our search.

But as we rowed from the island, Dianne's fear did not lessen. She
said, "We've done the best we could. If they are here--"

She did not finish. She added, "You haven't told any one--no one--I
mean the authorities--knows about me?"

"No, Dianne."

"Because, what I want you to do--you and father--it must be secret. And
Togaro, he will prevent your doing it if he can."

Strange words! She would not add to them. She sat silent and tense as
we rowed across the sunlit channel, and brought her home, where father
was waiting for us.

       *       *       *       *       *

"I'll tell them," said father. "Come in lads. We must be brief, Dianne.

"You're right that haste is necessary."

Father had been with Dianne and her strange girl companion for
perhaps half an hour. He called us in at last. He sat with his arm
about Dianne. I could see at once that he was tense and grim; and the
apprehension characteristic of Dianne lay now upon him also.

His quick glances about the room--as though he were trying to see the
unseeable. This thing uncanny--I saw too, that the room's windows were
carefully closed; and the heavy shades drawn, so that for all the
daylight outside, a lighted lamp was needed. Father told us sharply to
close the door after us.

He said, as we sat down:

"I was right to insist upon talking to Dianne alone. There are things I
could understand better than you--we have no time for discussion."

I burst out: "Are you going to keep on treating us like children?"

"No. Frank. You have a right to know these strange things Dianne has
told me. But we have no time for argument." His voice was low. He spoke
swiftly, with what seemed a surreptitious haste.

The girl Ahlma sat apart. Her gaze roved the room, especially the floor.

She said abruptly, "Dianne, can we not close up the bottom of that
door?"

There was perhaps a quarter of an inch space between the bottom of the
door and the sill. Father got up and kicked a rug against the door. He
turned up the wick of the lamp so that the room was brighter.

"Will that do?"

"Yes," said Dianne. "That's better."

Drake and I stared at each other. Drake wet his lips, but did not
speak. This thing was ghastly.

Father said abruptly, "Dianne was born, not in this world of ours, but
in a world infinitely small. A world within an atom of rock, there on
Bird's Nest Island--a world of humans like ourselves.

"Like us? Why, you can see for yourselves! Dianne was born a princess
of the civilization on one of the globes whirling in the limitless
space within that atom.

"I confuse you, lads? I am talking of infinite smallness. There is no
limit to smallness. We know that. But I can't go into such a subject
now."

"Afterward, you can tell them," said Dianne with her gentle smile. "All
I have told you--time then, father."

"You still call me father?" he said. "So strange, these things."

Drake said, "Dianne was brought here when she was a baby. Why?"

"A princess," father repeated. "And soon after she was born an evil
leader came into power in her world. Human life is the same everywhere,
lads. She has told me it all--you shall hear every detail. But now--I
need tell you only that Dianne's parents, with their throne threatened,
had their scientists spirit Dianne away. They have a drug--you can
call it that--and a space-flying vehicle, capable of changing size.
They brought their little princess out into what to them is infinite
largeness. Left her here. To save her life from this conqueror who
threatened their throne."

My thoughts reached to grasp what father was saying. I could envisage
an atom of rock there on Bird's Nest Island. One atom out of the
uncounted billions. It chanced to contain human life. I tried to
imagine becoming infinitely small. Space would, by comparison, open
up around me. The whirling electrons within the atom would be blazing
suns in a firmament of illimitable space. With a space-flying vehicle
infinitely small, I could then traverse that starry universe. Land upon
a dark star--a planet--an earth. And find there a human civilization.

I knew something of modern physics. I knew that the similarity of
atomic structure to our astronomical universe was already recognized. A
difference of size only. And all comparative. I could hold a fragment
of rock on the palm of my hand. Billions of atoms, clinging together to
make what I saw as a tiny rock fragment. Yet each of those atoms held
within itself a starry universe of limitless distance--if I were to
become small enough to see it from the other viewpoint.

I stared at Dianne. My sister? There suddenly seemed a vast gulf
between us. This gentle creature, so strangely beautiful, with the
crescent glowing on her forehead. Not my sister. A princess of a
different world.

She caught my gaze and smiled. And said, as she had said several times
before, "Don't look at me like that, Frank! I'll tell them, father.
That day Frank, when you and I and Drake went to the island. You call
it five years ago? When you left me, this Togaro suddenly appeared. He
took me--into the atom--into smallness--into what soon I learned was my
own native world.

"He wanted the throne which some day would have been mine. He--he
wanted--he wants me. But the people turned against him. I was
rescued--taken from him. I am ruler of that world now. I've told all
the details--your father will explain to you."

She was speaking fast, almost breathlessly. And I realized now the
regal dominance of her manner, mixed so queerly with the little Dianne
we used to know.

She went on: "I've come back here--and Togaro knows it. He learned,
some long time ago, our scientists' secret of traveling into
largeness--into this world of yours so gigantic. He learned English
from me. He learned many things of your Earth and its people.

"He has been here and seen for himself. He is here now--with a few
of his men. You have seen some of them. They happened to be a trifle
larger than your normal size and so you call them giants."

Drake put in, "Dianne, wait! Can't you answer some questions?"

"I would keep her here with us always," father said. "She knows that.
But she is going back at once. Her duty lies in there with her people.
But more than that--the menace of Togaro here--she must go back!"

"You don't talk so we can understand you, father," I objected.

The girl Ahlma spoke again. She addressed Dianne, but her gaze was on
Drake.

"I think, Dianne, you should tell them at once why we came. What it is
they must do for us."

Father said, "Lads, this Togaro and hordes of his followers are
planning to come from the atom. Some are already here. That's what
Dianne and her people want to stop. For our sake. She wants us to get
this atom of rock from Bird's Nest Island. Bring it here. She will go
back within it to her world. We are to keep it here. Guard it. You see?
Watch it, or have it watched day and night. Then the coming of Togaro's
hordes can be checked. We can see them appear--kill them as they come,
when still they are tiny."

Dianne interrupted him. "Togaro's plan is to come here--and with his
men in a size gigantic even compared to you, he will overrun your
Earth! Conquer it! Force your great nations to yield to his giants--"

Giants overrunning our world! I could with shuddering fancy imagine
one a thousand feet tall toppling the buildings of New York City
with sweeps of his arm! Of what use our battleships, our long-range
guns--any of our weapons against a horde of such gigantic antagonists?

Father said, "Our Earth could be devastated so easily! But if we can
get the atom here, now before it is too late--"

A cry from Ahlma checked him. There was an instant when all of us sat
mute with horror. In a distant corner of the room where a glow of our
table light fell upon the floor the small figure of a man was lurking.
A man, tall perhaps as the top of my shoe.

An instant while we were mute, frozen into immobility. Then I heard
Dianne murmur, "Togaro!"

And Drake cried, "Father--that is the fellow who called on us last
night!"

Drake's chair crashed over backward as he leaped to his feet. He
stooped. He seized the chair and flung it at the little lurking figure.

I shouted, "You missed him, Drake!" I dashed across the room. I had
seen the figure dart into a shadow.

Dianne lifted off the lampshade and tossed it away. The room floor
showed more clearly. We hastily moved the furniture. Then I saw the
figure again. Far smaller now--an inch high, no more. It had climbed
to the baseboard of the wall. Running upon the narrow ledge. It
leaped--the shadow of a chair enveloped it.

We ran about the room, searching. Like searching for an insect which
every instant was dwindling toward invisibility.

Dianne cried, "Too late! He's too small. But I saw him--right near
here."

She gripped me as I passed her. And cried, "Drake, wait! You and Frank,
will you come with me? If we get small--follow him into smallness here
in this room--we may catch him! Will you come?"




                              CHAPTER VI

                      _The Chase into Smallness_


Drake and I took the small pellets which Dianne offered. She had them
in a phial at her waist. She said hurriedly: "Ahlma, you stay here.
Keep her with you, father. Stay here in the room. Watch us--then, when
you can't see us any longer, sit down! Don't move about--you might
trample on us!"

It seemed that we had last seen the figure along the inner wall, away
from the door or the windows. This was a small room. Two windows on
one side, and the single door. It had once been a bedroom; but it was
furnished meagerly now, with a small table and a few chairs.

"Here," said Dianne, "I think this is the best place. He may be--right
here now. He could not go far--not far from this particular spot--when
he is so small. Stand beside me, Drake. Here, Frank."

Father stammered: "You--you won't be gone long?"

"No," said Dianne. "Togaro would not dare go far into smallness here.
It would lead him into the unknown--he would get lost. We will be
back--in an hour perhaps. You ready, Frank? Ready, Drake?"

The pellet tasted a trifle sweetish. It dissolved on my tongue. I
gulped and swallowed. Cold beads of sweat stood on my forehead. But
it was fear only. My head reeled. The room seemed to take a dizzying,
sweeping lurch. Dianne's steadying arm was around me and Drake; and
in a moment my senses cleared. I later learned the details of this
drug's effect. A contraction of the cells of my body, preserving their
form, contracting each of them in normal relation to the others. An
aura of its effect, like a magnetic field, was around me. My garments
contracting; even the air, as I breathed it, was diminished in all its
inherent molecules and atoms.

Dianne's voice said: "You feel all right?"

I heard Drake mutter: "Yes. But--Dianne--strange."

I was standing still, yet everywhere the room was in movement--a
crawling, flowing movement. I could see the near-by wall at which I
stared, moving upward, expanding, growing steadily larger. The ceiling
over me, lifting. The wall receding. A moment ago I could have touched
it. Not now. It was drawing back from me. A visual enlargement of all
my surroundings. An illusion, because I was dwindling.

I was still dizzy; I did not dare turn my head or shift my gaze. Beside
me was a chair. I could see it out of the tail of my eye. The chair was
shifting away, and growing huge. Already its seat loomed higher than my
head. I saw Dianne and Drake beside me; in all this movement they alone
were unchanged.

And I could feel the movement. The floor under my feet was shifting
with a steady crawl. It was spreading out, expanding. The pull of it
drew my feet apart so that every moment I had to take a step to keep
from falling. All this in what perhaps was a minute.

Dianne cast me off. "You're all right now. Come on--I think we should
stand nearer the wall."

The wall seemed ten feet or more from us now. We walked toward it. The
effect was dizzying, but we overcame that presently. Dianne turned and
waved her hand upward. Drake and I swung around to follow her gesture.

This room gigantic! The ceiling seemed thirty or forty feet above us.
The opposite wall was farther than that. High up were huge rectangles
of windows. The chairs and the table were enormous.

We moved again toward the wall. We ran this time. A foot or two away we
stopped.

Another minute passed. The room wall was white plastered, and it had
a lower baseboard of wood. The plaster surface rose sheer a hundred
feet now. It was like a great cliff-face. The lamplight up there was a
yellow glow. The baseboard was twice the height of our heads, with a
ledge on top upon which we could have walked. The wood looked rough and
jagged.

The visual growth went on. The wall was again far away, and receding so
fast that if we ran we might fail to reach it. The board floor under us
was turning rough--uneven, with ridges and undulations everywhere.

Another minute.

In the distance behind us one of the table legs rose like a huge
monolith into the heights of the lamplight. Shadows and blurred, dark
outlines were up there. Farther away on the rolling, jagged surface
which was now the floor I could see a formless dark blur which might
have been one of father's feet. Half a mile away, perhaps, and
receding in the distance.

Then even the nearer wall was gone! Vaguely, as though it were some
ten miles off, it loomed like the white sheen of an ice cliff. Then
vanished.

We stood alone in the midst of a tumbled region. A great tumbled
plain--crudely level. Vacant distance everywhere. Overhead, in what to
us was now the sky, a faint yellow sheen of radiance mingled with the
haze of space.

There were pits all about us now; depressions, in depth twice the
height of our bodies, with steep but jagged sides. We were still
diminishing; the landscape crawled with expanding movement. It kept us
active now. At our feet, often a small hole would open up so that we
would have to move to a higher ridge to keep from falling or sliding
into the yawning hole.

We stood precariously upon a small peak. With unnatural microscopic
clearness it seemed to me that my vision might carry a hundred miles
across this tumbled landscape. Weird vista! Like nothing I had ever
seen on earth. Not even like pictures of the lunar landscapes. Some
unknown planet, perhaps, might look like this. A land convulsed by
an angry nature, flung and tumbled by some great cataclysm into this
broken chaos.

With an effort I turned my thoughts into the other viewpoint. This was
a few square inches--a foot or two perhaps--of the rough, scuffled
board flooring in the bedroom of our Maine home! It seemed, far away as
I stared, that there was a great vertical slash crossing the distant
horizon. A cañon deep and wide--I knew that probably it was the space
between the boards of the floor. A mile or so away in another direction
was a huge caldron; a circular pit a mile wide, with a broken and
jagged rim. The crater of some volcano? It was in reality a broken
knothole, a blemish in the rough board of the floor.

We had been talking at intervals. I said once, thoughtlessly:

"But, Dianne--going into your atom, would it be so very much farther
than this?"

She smiled. Drake exclaimed, "Don't be an ass, Frank!"

Dianne said gently, "This would be just the start. I have the drug in a
more powerful form."

"How long a trip, Dianne? To get into your world, from ours, I mean?"

"With greater intensities of the drug, Frank, we diminish much faster.
The whole trip--you would call it three or four days, perhaps."

Three or four days! And we had been now some five minutes!

We had, all this time, been watching closely for any sign of Togaro.
Dianne was sure that he had vanished somewhere near here.

"But, Dianne, when he was larger than we are now," Drake objected, "Why
if he ran off there"--he gestured with a sweep of his arm toward our
dim horizon--"he'd be a hundred miles from here by now."

She nodded. "Yes. But he would not dare move far. We would see him. But
if he were hiding--"

There were certainly places to hide here now. Caverns--yawning
tunnel-entrances opening up everywhere.

Dianne cautioned, "Watch out, Frank!"

We had moved down from the ridge; to stay there would have left us
stranded upon a precipitous height. Drake and Dianne seized me--I had
nearly fallen as the shifting ground altered under me. We clung to a
slope; slid down it. We landed, unharmed, some twenty feet down, in a
bowl-like depression.

It seemed now that all this area was a honeycomb. Underground passages
opened here into the bowl. Tunnels. Caves, small and elongated. All
this underground area a honeycomb of cells. Cellular caves of the wood
structure!

Drake started thoughtlessly into a dim passageway. But Dianne stopped
him.

"We must not separate. If you get lost--"

We stood in a cave. The light was fading. The opening tunnels and
expanding pits near us were dark. And it was all very silent. Our
voices seemed dead and muffled.

I presently became aware that the expanding movement around us had
ceased. The dose of the drug we had taken had reached its limit. We
were no longer diminishing.

We stood, instinctively whispering. Was Togaro near here? How in all
these miles of cellular caverns could we ever hope to locate him? We
walked, keeping close together, through a tubelike passage; came into
another cave. We had gone downward; it was even more dim in here.

It occurred to me suddenly that we had brought no weapons. In the awed
fear of our taking the drug for the first time, confronting this
unknown experience, we had completely forgotten them.

"Could we have brought them?" Drake asked.

"A small revolver perhaps," said Dianne. "Held under your arm. I never
thought of it--we have no such weapons in our world. Togaro, I think,
will not have them--and you are two against him."

"We'll never find him," I declared. "Not in such a place as this. How
small would he get, do you think?"

"He would not dare get very small. It would lead him--you can see--into
the unknown."

I could indeed. These caves here under us--another of those pellets;
it would carry us down, with illimitable space opening up around us.
Even this small area upon which my foot now rested would open up into a
universe if I were to get small enough!

Drake said, "No use exploring here. Not in this size. Dianne, how about
us getting larger? A trifle larger--and on the upper surface we can
move about--cover a greater area. We might locate him--"

Togaro had the drug in the same size pellets as did Dianne. It seemed
likely that he would have taken one--come to this size we now had
reached. But to go back he would have to get larger again. We might
have our best chance of encountering him going back. Or wait, up there
in the room--with a bright light and careful watch.

We stood at the entrance of a huge elongated cavern. A dozen of these
tunnel mouths, about as high as our heads, opened into it. The cavern
was some two hundred feet in length; half as wide and a hundred feet
or so high. A flattened elongated cell. It was dim and shadowed. Our
lowered voices reverberated across it with muffled echoes.

Drake said, "No chance this way, Dianne."

But we had miscalculated this fellow Togaro. He had not been attempting
to escape us; he was luring us on. Progressively smaller always than
ourselves--since he had taken the drug before we did--he had kept
within sight of us.

We saw him now, standing along the side of this cavern not fifty feet
from us! A stalwart, heavy-set figure; trousers, a white shirt open at
the throat exposing a massive hairy chest. He was now somewhat shorter
than Drake, though taller than I. He had been lurking in some recess of
the cavewall. He came out and the movement attracted us.

I cried, "There he is!"

Drake and I would have rushed at him, but Dianne seized us.

"Wait!"

A glow of light from some overhead opening fell upon the standing
figure. Bare-headed; massive, bullet head. A face--the face of the
midnight visitor--regarding us sardonically.

And in that instant Drake and I realized why Dianne was holding us. She
was fumbling frantically at her belt.

The leering figure of Togaro off there was visibly growing larger! An
instant and he was as tall as Drake. Then taller.

He came leaping at us!




                              CHAPTER VII

                 _The Flight in the Cellular Caverns_


Dianne's hand came from her belt. "Here--take this! Just touch it to
your tongue. Only that! Then give it back to me!"

Her hand went to her own mouth. I moistened my tongue with the pellet.

Togaro had almost reached us. Drake leaped forward. Dianne cried in
agonized terror, "Oh, Drake--Drake, you took too much!"

Drake had gulped all of his pellet. He leaped at the oncoming figure
of Togaro. They locked together, fighting. I broke from Dianne. As
I jumped forward a corrugation of the floor caught my foot. I fell
headlong; stunned for a moment, but I got up.

In the center of the cavern the swaying forms of Drake and Togaro were
fighting. They were both already far larger than Dianne and me! Giant
fighting forms. Growing swiftly. In a moment they looked fifteen or
twenty feet tall. A weaponless, hand-to-hand fight. Togaro was bending
Drake backward. Drake's hands gripped the fellow's throat. Then they
went down. Rolling together, each struggling to land on top. Still
larger now--their lurching bodies filled one end of the cavern.

Dianne clung to me. I became aware that I was struggling to escape her.
And aware also that the cave seemed dwindling. A slow contraction, but
the dim space here was already noticeably smaller.

"Dianne, let me go!"

"No! They're too large! You'd be killed!"

Large! They were gigantic! A sweep of one of their massive arms or legs
would have flung me headlong as though I had been a child. I crouched
with Dianne, watching them. Powerless to help Drake.

Then I realized: "Dianne, give me more of the drug."

"No!" She called, "Drake! Drake, you--"

Her words were lost in the turmoil of the fighting giants. The roof of
the cavern had a long irregular opening into the space above it. Light
filtered down. The light illumined the huge threshing bodies. Togaro
was on top. His arm, longer than my body now, went up as he tried to
strike at Drake. Then Drake heaved him off.

They had rolled away from where Dianne and I were crouching. They were
soon so large that half the cavern scarce contained them. Togaro tried
to stand up with Drake lunging at his waist. His shoulders brushed the
roof. He could not stand erect.

Dianne was screaming now. "Drake! Drake! Climb out of here! You'll be
crushed!" An agony of fear was in her voice.

It swept me with a realization of horror. Growing so fast, these
fighting giants, that in a moment more the cavern would not be large
enough for them! Crushed in here by their own growth.

I added my shouts to Dianne's. "Drake! Climb out--through the hole up
there."

They both realized the danger. They were almost wedged between this
hundred-foot floor and roof. We could see Togaro trying to cast Drake
backward--trying to escape through the gash overhead. He seemed to
succeed. His fist caught Drake full in the face. Drake crumpled, but in
a moment recovered. Togaro had cast loose. Scrambling, half climbing,
his great body lurched up through the roof opening.

But Drake was after him. He stood, bent double within the narrow
confines of these walls. He scrambled up, against all the efforts of
Togaro to shove him back.

They fought in the space over us. Already too large to come back.
Their bodies fell as again they locked together. Fell across the roof
opening, so huge now that we could see only a portion of their legs.

Again the space up there must have been too small. They scrambled
higher. The sounds of the fighting faded into the upper distance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Father sat with Ahlma, watching us as we dwindled before his horrified
eyes. He saw us, an inch high, standing by the wall. Dianne called,
"Good-by." He saw us smaller, running across the tiny space, still
closer to the wall. He did not dare move. He sat by the table with
Ahlma beside him. She put her hand out presently and touched his arm;
his hand gripped hers and held it.

He said softly, "You love my girl Dianne?"

"Oh, yes. My friend and our princess."

"You're older?"

"A little."

He paused. "Ahlma, will you bring her back to me when this is over?
Will you? We'll get the fragment of rock which holds your atom. I'll
guard it carefully. Will you bring Dianne back to me?"

She turned her face to him, a face perhaps as beautiful as Dianne's,
gentle, thoughtful. She brushed away a straying lock of her golden
hair. Her blue eyes regarded father. She said, "Yes. I will urge her.
And would you like me to come?"

"Yes," he said. And at the pressure of her hand, he added, "Oh,
but don't you understand, Ahlma--Dianne seems to me just my little
daughter--I love her."

"I understand." Her gaze still held his. In the blue depths of her eyes
he saw a light twinkling like a smile. But her voice was very earnest
as she added:

"And I will come also." The twinkling light in her eyes spread to a
whimsical smile twitching at her lips. "What a handsome young man your
son Drake is."

Half an hour must have passed. Or perhaps more. They sat, watching the
small segment of floor into which we had vanished. There was a moment
or two, father recalls, when it chanced that they were talking, and
their glances strayed away. When they looked back, Ahlma gave a cry.

"I see--"

Father started to his feet, but she held him. He saw nothing. "What?
What is it, Ahlma?"

"One of them!"

A single figure. A speck, there on the board. Ahlma lifted the
lampshade. He saw it then. Something there--

"One of them!" she repeated. Her voice caught in her throat as terror
swept her. "Only one! A man!"

She cautiously drew father forward. They knelt carefully on the floor,
bending down over the board. A tiny figure there, an eighth of an inch
long. But it grew. Half an inch! A man's figure. Clothes torn and
blood-stained.

Drake! He lay on his side. But he moved. He drew himself up on one
elbow.

An inch long now. He tried to stand, but swayed and fell back. He had
spoken, but they did not hear it. He waved an arm.

A warning, but it was too late! Behind them as they knelt there was a
footstep. They turned. Togaro--as large as Ahlma--leaped at them!

       *       *       *       *       *

Drake, down there in the caverns with the small figures of Dianne and
me watching, fought with Togaro. He was aware of the shrinking walls.
He heard and understood our tiny screams of warning. He scrambled up
through the roof opening after Togaro. The space overhead was a caldron
depression. They fought there. Togaro had been the first to take the
drug. He was rapidly becoming larger than Drake. His strength was
overpowering. They rolled together. Drake felt the big hands gripping
his throat. He tried to tear them loose, but could not. It stopped his
breath. He tried to heave his adversary off. But Togaro was too large.
Too strong.

The lunge jammed them both against a wall which almost wedged them. It
must have brought realization to Togaro. He suddenly cast Drake loose.

Drake's senses had almost faded; but with returning breath he
strengthened. The walls were closing. Togaro scrambled out. Drake tried
to stand up. His head and shoulders came above the closing caldron. He
jumped; and as he scrambled out Togaro's fist caught him in the face.

He fell; and though he did not quite lose consciousness he lay
motionless. Togaro struck him again. Beat him, kicked him. Drake had
just the wits left to pretend insensibility.

This partly open space was again closing. A ravine in the corrugations
of the upper surface. Togaro's attention was again distracted by
the narrowing space. He evidently thought his adversary dead; or
unconscious so that he would lie here and be crushed by his own
growth. He left Drake. He leaped away, scrambled up and ran.

For a moment Drake lay quiet. He stayed as long as he dared. Then he
tried to sit up. He had barely the strength to pull himself out as the
ravine narrowed to a slit beneath him.

He fell prone. Togaro had disappeared. Drake lay amid the tumbled
ridges of the upper surface. The ridges crawled and crept under him as
his body grew. He was far enough out so that his body pushed itself
over the surface undulations with its own growth. He fainted.

When he recovered consciousness--it must have been five minutes or
so--he could distinguish the outlines of the giant room. He heard the
rumble of father and Ahlma talking--their voices booming far up there
in the radiance of the lamplight.

He was still growing. Togaro had escaped being seen by father and the
girl. He had run to another corner of the room; stood quietly behind
them, growing to their size.

Drake saw the monstrous forms of Father and Ahlma come forward. He lay
on his side. They loomed over him--tremendous giants peering down with
great faces far overhead. And behind them--almost equally gigantic--he
suddenly saw Togaro!

Drake tried to call a warning. But they did not hear him. He was still
weak and faint. He got up on one elbow. He gestured frantically. He saw
the tremendous figure of Togaro leap at father.

Togaro's growth had stopped. He was as tall as father. His fist caught
father and knocked him backward. He would have stamped upon Drake,
but Ahlma saw the intention. She hurled herself at Togaro. Fighting,
tearing at his face with her hands. And father assailed him also.

Drake saw the three huge figures swaying above him; Togaro, with a foot
twice the length of Drake's body, was trying to get near enough to
stamp upon him. Drake saw that father and the girl were being worsted.
He tried to get to his feet, but he was too weak and dizzy. He sank
back.

Then Ahlma broke away. She seized the lamp and flung it. The lamp
fortunately was extinguished as it crashed to the floor. The room with
its drawn shades, in spite of the daylight outside, was too dim for the
small figure of Drake to be seen.

And then Ahlma began screaming. Togaro cursed. Perhaps he thought
there was help near by. Whatever he thought, he flung father from him,
and turning in the dimness, he fumbled for the door. Snatched it open;
ran through the hall and dashed from the house.




                             CHAPTER VIII

                         _Death of the Giants_


We returned to our normal size; and found Drake, father and Ahlma
together. Father was shaken by his encounter with Togaro, but unharmed.
Drake was bruised, battered and bleeding; but with his youth and
strength he soon recovered.

The afternoon wore away. We had decided to start for the island as soon
as it was dark. There was no sign of Togaro.

I talked that afternoon for more than an hour with Dianne. She told me
many things of her strange world. Drake talked with Ahlma. I heard him
say once, "You saved my life--he would have stamped upon me."

I recall with what a singular mixture of emotion I touched Dianne's
hand. My adored little sister? A strange foreign princess? The two
ideas, so wholly different, mingled in my heart. I recall, too, the
flush on Drake's face, his low eager voice as he talked with Ahlma.

The darkness closed in around King's Cove. We were ready to start.
Father, with an automatic in his hand, followed us down to the
boathouse. We had tried to have him summon a car and go to the village
earlier in the afternoon. Or summon help.

"Nonsense, lads--I can take care of myself. We've got to keep this
secret. Why, suppose the authorities were to order that atom destroyed!"

The channel was black. The sea was calm, with a sullen, oily calmness.
No giants had been reported. The lights of occasional patrol planes
passed overhead; out at sea the lights of the waiting battleship were
plainly visible.

Drake and I rowed swiftly, with the two girls huddled in the stern. I
was tense, my mind roving upon a thousand weird unnatural dangers which
at any moment might come upon us. But there seemed nothing.

The island loomed black and silent ahead of us. What was there?

I shipped my oar. We grounded on the beach. No sign of anything.

We prowled through the dark trees, with automatics ready. Drake had a
small flash light. We came upon the embers of Dianne's signal fire of
the morning.

Tiny figures stirred in the grass under Drake's light.

"Careful, Drake."

Dianne bent down cautiously. A microscopic voice called up to her. She
said to us:

"They have not seen Togaro."

She led us a few feet to one side of the embers. "Drake, give me your
light."

There was a patch of soft loam here, with grass and ferns growing in
it. A small rock projected up in the grass. No one would ever have
noticed it. Drake and I knelt down carefully over it. Dianne held the
light.

It was the top of what seemed a bowlder buried here. Only a few jagged
inches showed. Rock, scarred and pitted; coppery-looking. Metallic.

Drake murmured, "Why, this is a meteorite buried here."

It seemed so. We dug with our fingers in the soil around the
projection. The thing bulged out underground. A meteorite that might
have weighed a ton. Metallic rock, scarred and pitted and fused by the
heat of its falling through the atmosphere to earth. Centuries ago it
might have fallen, a visitor from the realms of space. It had buried
itself here; or been buried since by the drifting silt of the passing
years.

Dianne had known nothing of its being a meteorite. She showed us now
the top projection. Made us understand carefully the exact point within
which her atom was contained. It was easy to remember. A tiny crater--a
pit into which a pin-point might go.

"We descend into that," she said.

We studied the configurations of the projection. With my hunting knife
I could break off the top fragment easily.

She added, "Guard it somewhere--with that little crater held upward as
it is now."

Ahlma said abruptly, "There is a storm coming."

Rain was beginning to fall. The clouds overhead were black. Thunder
rumbled in the distance. And then there was a lightning flash nearer at
hand. It brightened all the island for an instant.

Ahlma cried, "Look there! Did you see him?"

The darkness was already again like a wall around us. But we had all
seen a giant figure looming into the blackness. A giant, here on the
island beach!

Another lightning flash. The storm burst over us, with a surge of wind
and rain. Upon the circular island beach, stationed at intervals, giant
figures had grown into the sky. Six of them so huge that by leaning
forward they might have touched hands across the island.

Dianne whispered, "We must get smaller! They can trample the island."

We were surrounded by them, trapped here--but even in our normal size
we were so small that they evidently had not yet seen us.

In the glare of lightning as we crouched, we saw one of the giants
lift our dory in his hand, crush it like a bug, and fling it out to
sea. Another stooped and fumbled with his fingers over the island
underbrush. He plucked up trees, as one would pull up stalks of fern.

But the section where we crouched, hiding now in a near-by bush, was
undisturbed. Why, we never knew. Perhaps because Togaro was near here.
Or expected here.

Already the presence of the giants was discovered. A war plane circled
overhead, swooping through the storm. Its bomb dropped with a hiss
into the near-by water. Then a shot screamed past from the advancing
battleship.

Dianne gave us just a taste of the drug to diminish our stature. The
island expanded. We crouched in a great jungle of forest growth which
had been the thicket. Pebbles strewn here grew to great bowlders. We
found a cavelike recess and squeezed into it. Miles of jungle and
strange, dark land spread around us. Up in the sky, where the lightning
flashed and a great torrent of water was pouring down, the bombardment
of the island began.

The world knows of that night's events, that soon after nightfall six
giants appeared upon Bird's Nest Island off the coast of Maine. They
were attacked by the patrol planes.

The giants seemed great stupid brutes. Confused, perhaps. They plucked
at the island's trees. They waded out into the water and back. They
reached into the sea and flung huge dripping bowlders at the attacking
planes.

The hovering battleship advanced. Its shots screamed at the island. One
of the giants went down. He floundered in the water, with the others
clustering in frightened amazement about him. Then his great body lay
still. It sank, but rose again and drifted out to sea.

The planes dropped bombs. One of the giants, wounded, bellowed with
cries that were heard all down the coast. He waded frantically out
toward the warship which was some three miles off. But the ocean was
too deep for him. He swam back. A shot struck him. He crumpled.

An upflung bowlder hit one of the planes and brought it down. The
planes flew higher after that.

The coast was lashed with the waves of the giants' threshing bodies.
Another fell; his head and shoulders sprawled across half of Bird's
Nest Island.

The brief unseasonable electrical storm swept past. In half an hour of
the battle but one giant was left. He tried to escape. He reached the
mainland, staggering south. He fell, ten miles down the coast.

We crouched in the silence and darkness which had again fallen upon the
island.

Drake murmured: "It's over."

Dianne took us back to our normal size. Sea planes were landing in
the water of the channel. Clusters of lights showed where boats were
heading swiftly for the floating bodies of the fallen giants.

Launches were putting out from the battleships. Other boats coming out
from the mainland. A destroyer dashed up and anchored in the channel.
Planes circled overhead. Activity everywhere. A dozen boats were
advancing upon the island.

We had regained normal size. We stood in a group in the darkness of the
island glade.

"We must hurry," Dianne whispered. "Frank, you understand--you chip off
the fragment of rock. Wait a few minutes--ten minutes--after we are
gone. Then you can't harm us. Take the rock home, guard it. Oh, Frank,
keep it secret--and we'll come back some time."

Why all these directions only to me? I might have realized then, but I
did not.

Dianne kissed me; Ahlma pressed my hand. The girls were already
dwindling. The little figures of their escort lurked at our feet. I
turned to Drake.

"We'll wait ten minutes and--"

I gasped. He too was dwindling. He said hurriedly: "I'm going, Frank.
You explain to father."

I stood stricken. I recall his last words of instructions: "Togaro
may have gone into the atom; or he may be here in our world. Watch out
for him, Frank! These few giants mean nothing. Stupid brutes he has
sacrificed--a test only of what he plans."

"But Drake--stop!"

I stood frozen. I was suddenly horribly frightened. Confused. A step,
and I might kill them. I called, but there was only silence. I had the
flash light, but if I lighted it I might blind them.

I sat down by the dead fire. Five minutes. Ten minutes. I heard boats
landing upon the beach, and the shouts of arriving men.

But they must not find me until I had done what I had to do! I stood
up hastily. With the flash light I located the projecting top of the
meteorite. My fingers were trembling as I opened my claspknife. I
recall that I was mumbling to myself:

"Steady, Frank! Don't do it wrong."

I knelt. I chipped at the rock. My pounding heart nearly smothered me.
The tramp of advancing men sounded near at hand.

I hacked desperately. The rock fragment came off--a chunk a few inches
in diameter. I laid it carefully in my pocket. I snapped off my flash.
I huddled, shaking, by the wet embers of the dead fire. My brother!

Men surrounded me.

"What the hell?"

"Who is he?"

I stammered: "Let me go."

A turmoil of rough questions. "Who are you? What are you doing here?"

"Ferrule. My name is Frank Ferrule. I live over there--King's Cove."

Other men from another boat came up.

"I've heard of the Ferrules. House across there at King's Cove."

"Yes. That's where I live. My father's there now. I was here--got
trapped here when the fighting started."

Somebody said: "He's scared stiff."

"Let go of me," I insisted. "Take me home."

They shoved me into one of their boats.

In the babble of excited voices I was soon ignored. I sat with my hand
in my pocket, gently holding the precious chunk of rock.




                              CHAPTER IX

                        _Tiny Fragment of Rock_


A year passed. Father and I lived permanently now at King's Cove. In
a special room, with three trusted guards, the fragment of rock lay
carefully watched. Nothing--no one, friend or enemy--appeared during
that year; and we began to think that perhaps no one ever would.

Father's health was not good. The shock of losing Drake was very great.
He said it was not that. He said always--and so wistfully--that Drake
would come back to us. And Dianne.

The world, for months, talked of those days of the giants. But the
world soon forgets. The giants were an enigma--a menace--but our war
planes and the battleship soon overcame it. No one, after a year,
seemed afraid of giants; in a few years more they would be history,
forgotten completely.

No drugs were found on the bodies of the giants. They wore, the reports
said, a belt with many empty compartments. To whom could that possibly
be significant, save father and me?

I sat often alone at night in the barred room, by the light which
shone on the rock fragment as it rested on its smooth slab of stone. A
microscope stood in a bracket which in an instant could be swung into
position. Nothing could appear there without our seeing it at once. If
the menace came, we were ready always to deal with it.

Tiny fragment of rock lying there, with its billions of atoms--each a
universe. One--the universe that held Dianne.

I wondered, so often, what she and Drake and Ahlma might be doing down
there in the Infinitely Small. Trying, perhaps, to protect us from the
menace? It seemed so.

Often I cursed my helplessness. I could put my finger down and touch
the fragment of rock. An eighth of an inch of space--no more than that,
perhaps--separated me from Dianne. Yet it was an infinite, hopeless
void of distance.

And then one night in May, as I sat alone, staring at the rock
fragment, hope which I had thought dead leaped within me.

Something had come from the atom! Under the glare of light,
where all these hopeless days and nights nothing living had ever
appeared--something moved.

A speck, appearing from invisible smallness.

It grew.

A tiny human figure, small as a pinhead, was upon the jagged piece of
rock. I swung the microscope over it.

And I saw a man in tattered, blood-stained garments, clinging to the
rock, waving a white flag frantically at me!




                               CHAPTER X

                           _The White Flag_


Father and I had of necessity changed our whole mode of life when we
undertook the watching of the rock fragment. We gave up our Westchester
residence, to live the year around at King's Cove. Father moved his
laboratory from Westchester; I relinquished my flying job.

The house at King's Cove, unheated, was not suitable for winter
conditions. We installed a heating plant. We cleared out one of the
small bedrooms. Barred its windows and its door, so that it had all the
aspect of a cell.

The windows we sealed, not to be opened. A new door was hung, closely
fitting so that there was not the smallest crack. Into the ceiling we
cut a small ventilator to keep the air of the room fresh.

There was one small chair. In the center of the room there was a flat,
six-foot-square slab of granite. It was raised above the floor on a
sturdy pedestal. In its center lay the precious chunk of rock, with a
dome-light over it--the white electric glare shining strongly down.

The microscope hung in a bracket; and there was another bracket--a rack
of bottles and atomizers. Gruesome to contemplate using them! Bottles
of acids and poisons; atomizers to spray poison liquids! These tiny
humans which might appear would be treated like deadly insects, at once
to be exterminated.

We had three guards employed. Between them, they covered the entire
twenty-four hours. They sat armed with automatics. At ten-minute
intervals they searched the fragment of rock with the microscope. An
electric bell-switch was close at hand, so that in an instant father
and I could be summoned.

Yet for all this neither father nor I could for a moment relax.
Alternating with our hopeless moods that Drake and Dianne were gone
forever was the feeling that Togaro might at any moment attack us.
Within the atom thousands perhaps of his followers were preparing to
conquer the earth.

It was nerve-racking business. Father was breaking down under the
heart-rending strain of it. I knew he could not possibly go on for
another year, living under such conditions.

There was never a moment when he and I both dared leave the house at
once.

He was asleep this momentous night in mid-May. I had sent the guard out
for a ten-minute relaxation. I saw the figure appear. I stood shaking,
peering down into the small microscope. The magnified chunk of rock
showed jagged and broken. Upon the upper lip of the crater-like hole
the tiny figure was visible. A man, blood-stained and battered, with a
waving white flag in his hand.

I turned from the microscope. I could just make him out with the naked
eye--a pin-point of white movement.

I rang the bell for father. I stood trembling. Confused by the shock of
this actuality which for so long we had been contemplating. A whirl of
confused thoughts plunged at me. Was it Drake?

No! It did not seem to look like Drake.

A friend? An enemy? Should I kill it? What was I waiting for?

I became aware that I had seized an atomizer. A puff of it and a
torrent of deadly spray would kill that tiny figure; and kill,
doubtless, any others which might be there, too small yet for me to see.

I held my hand. A friend? A white flag--of truce?

The figure was expanding. Without the microscope now I could see it
clearly in the brilliant white light.

Dare I let it get larger? I shouted: "Wait! You--stop!"

Father burst into the room. "Frank!"

And behind him the burly figure of the returning guard. Both were
panting from running and from excitement.

"Frank?"

"Something here! Father, look! Man--with a white flag. See? See him
wave it?"

Father seized the microscope. He was trembling so that at first he
could hardly hold it. I clutched the poison spray; the guard stood
behind us, alert with an automatic, and his gaze roved the room.

Father murmured: "Not Drake? Is it not Drake?"

"No."

"Oh--No, no, you're right--it is not Drake." The disappointment in his
voice! "Not Drake--a man, a stranger."

I pulled at father. "You can see him now without the microscope."

The guard--a fellow named Foley, as near without nerves as a man could
be--stammered:

"You--you going to kill it--him?"

"Yes! No! No, Frank!" Father clutched at me. "Look, he's climbing down."

The figure of the man was a quarter of an inch high now. He started
climbing down the two or three inch jagged side of the chunk of rock.
He slipped, slid; and then fell and landed upon the polished surface of
the granite slab. He lay motionless.

"He killed himself, Frank!"

"No--look, he's up again!"

He was standing by the rock which towered like a cliff beside him. He
was in a moment half an inch high. The white flag was a piece of white
fabric. He had thrust it in his belt; he drew it out again and waved it
wildly at us.

I said: "He's afraid we'll kill him." I put the spray back on the
overhead shelf. "Think he can hear us, father? Understand us?"

"Yes. Maybe. Try it, Frank. Don't let him get too large. Tell him to
stop. You see anybody else?"

Foley said: "I'll take a look." He applied his eye to the microscope.

"Don't shout, Frank. Slow, distinct. He'll hear you better that way."

I said: "Don't--get--much--larger! We'll kill you."

"Suppose he doesn't speak our language," father began.

Foley said: "Nobody else. He--this one--he's all smashed up. Bloody.
You can see his feet; he's got 'em bound with rags."

The figure seemed to understand me. I could see the tiny face looking
up. He seemed to be shouting at me. I turned to Foley.

"Wait, Foley. Quiet."

In the silence, as I bent down, the small words came clear:

"Don't--kill me! Friend--friend--from Drake."

From Drake! The word thrilled us. We stood breathless, watching the
figure on the granite slab. An inch high now. A young man. Bruised and
bleeding as though from arduous, desperate traveling.

His brief suit of knitted fabric was torn, dirty and blood-stained. His
head was bare, showing his close-cut blond hair. His feet were wrapped
into shapeless bundles with cloth seemingly torn from his garments. He
stood wavering. He put the white flag into a belt at his waist--a belt
which we could see now held many compartments.

Two inches high. He walked away from the chunk of rock. The light
overhead appeared to dazzle him; he flung an arm before his face. But
it seemed also that in the far distance he had seen the void which was
the edge of the granite slab. He shrank back; then he looked up.

"Don't hurt me!"

His accent reminded me of Ahlma. Or Togaro! the thought came to me:
was this a trap? This fellow with his white flag, was he from Togaro,
masquerading here as a friend of Drake's?

Then triumph swept me. Here was the drug! This fellow had it!

Father was plucking at me as I bent intent over the growing figure.

"Frank, do we dare let him get large?"

The man was three or four inches high now. I put my face down close to
him. It startled him so that he jumped backward and fell. But he picked
himself up at once.

I said: "Can you hear me clearly?"

"Yes. Are you--is it you that are Frank Ferrule?"

"Yes," I said. "You stop getting larger. Stop, you understand? Then
we'll talk. Are you alone?"

"Yes." He fumbled at his belt; then his hand went to his mouth. In
a moment his size was unchanging. "Alone." He added, his tiny voice
sounding clearly:

"Yes, here all alone. They wait for me in there--a portion of the trip
in there, they are waiting with the flying car."

Father was whispering to me triumphantly:

"He's got the drug! With that, Frank, we can do anything. But we've got
to let him grow to our size. Don't you understand--let him grow large
and expand the drug with him!"

I had not thought of that. If this fellow were an enemy and it ended
by our having to kill him, the drug he carried would be of no use to
us. I stared down at his tiny figure, no longer than my finger. To a
comparative giant like myself, of what use his infinitesimal quantity
of the drug! We would have to let him grow large.

"What's your name?" I asked him.

"I am called Alt. I am sent to you from Drake. Trust me--do not kill
me. I have a message for you."

Father said, "If you are from Drake--did he write to us? Send something
to prove who you are?"

"No. That I mean--yes, he gave me a paper, but I have lost it. The
journey was hard--"

Suspicion rose in me. But friend or enemy, we wanted his drug. I
flashed father and Foley a warning glance. It would not be dangerous to
let this fellow reach our own size--provided we were alert to keep him
from getting any larger than us. I said.

"You're hurt. We'll dress your wounds.

"You can get larger--but be sure to stop when you are the size of me,
or we will kill you."

He was docile enough. He said, "Very well, then I will do that."

He sat down on the rock slab and we watched him with a tense silence.
In a moment he was a foot long; then twice that. His growing body
pushed against the rock fragment. "Move!" I said sharply, "stand
up--I'll lift you to the floor."

I ran my fingers over him; he seemed unarmed. I lifted him and set him
on the floor at our feet. Foley moved the light to shine upon him; and
stood with weapon ready.

Father cautioned grimly, "You obey us--no trickery."

He stood quietly eying us. High as my waist; then my shoulder. I said,
"Enough! That's large enough."

I whispered to Foley; and when the figure ceased enlarging Foley
pounced upon him.

"Give me that belt! The drug--give it up, damn you!"

He made no move to resist us. He stood meek--a slim young man now
about my own height; and about my own age. He was pale and tired, in
miserable plight, covered with cuts and bruises.

I seized his belt, stripped it from him. An affair of metal and fabric,
with compartments in which were metal vials of the drug. Possession of
it brought me a wild sense of power. Helpless no longer!

Foley backed the fellow to a corner of the room. "Stand there till they
say what to do with you."

We were not afraid of him now. "Easy, Foley--don't hurt him!" I added,
"Now you can tell us what you came for."

He said with a rush, "You do not trust me, but I speak truth. Drake--he
is your brother?--he, with the Princess Dianne and the Lady Ahlma are
in the flying car. Waiting. And they sent me out alone to you. I had a
paper from Drake--I have lost it--"

"Why didn't Drake come?" I demanded.

"He stays to protect the princess. The men of Togaro are everywhere--in
every size."

He almost convinced me, with the swift, apprehensive look he flung
about the room.

Father said, "What was Drake's message? Don't you know?"

"Yes, I know. He wants--weapons. Our world in there is
threatened--disaster--destruction of all our little world. Our
people--following Togaro--have gone mad. Too gigantic for our little
world to hold them! And yes, they threaten your earth too--but that
you control safely out here in this room. Drake would have me tell you
the invasion is coming. You must be watchful to kill them as they come
out--and Drake wants weapons, to threaten them so that they may not go
completely mad and wreck our little world."

Weapons? My suspicions leaped anew. Did this fellow think he could come
here and we would give him weapons?

Father demanded, "What sort of weapons?"

"Not many--just two or three, for Drake to use to convince our people
of his power. A knife-blade of steel--to bring death swift and silent.
And he said, what you call automatics--two or three of them."

"Give you those and let you go in?" I retorted sarcastically.

His pale blue eyes opened wide. "Drake said you--his brother Frank, he
said--would come with me. He wants you--I am to guide you to where he
waits."

My heart leaped. Guide me in! Why, of course! From the moment I knew I
had the drug, there had been in the back of my mind the knowledge that
I was going in to Drake. I had not thought of a guide. Necessary, of
course, if I were to locate where Drake was waiting. And here was the
guide.

Father stammered, "No! I can't--can't let you do that, Frank. This
fellow--a lying impostor perhaps, to lure you in there."

Would I go? Dare I risk it? I heard myself saying calmly, grimly,

"All right. I'll go in with you."




                              CHAPTER XI

                           _Giant in Ambush_


Within an hour I was ready. An hour of hurried, feverish preparation.
Yet after all, there was not much to do. I wore a bathing suit, with
a belt of the drugs strapped about my waist. And the stoutest shoes I
owned.

Foley's eyes were never for a moment off this fellow Alt. He appeared
inoffensive enough. He was not badly injured. Exhausted--he seemed only
to desire a rest; he lay quiet while we bathed and dressed his wounds.
They were bruises and superficial cuts where he had fallen on the sharp
rocks of his outward journey. His feet were the worst. He had started
with a pair of buskins, made of animal skin. The rocks had torn them to
shreds; his feet were bleeding and swollen.

"Couldn't Drake get you shoes?" I demanded. "Something to protect your
feet better than that?"

He smiled. A friendly, ingenuous sort of smile. I was alternating
between liking him and being suspicious of him.

"No," he said. "We do not have what you call shoes. Drake did not know
the journey would be so bad for me. It should not--I was not clever--I
did it wrong."

"What do you mean by that? You got lost?"

"No. Not lost--I will show you what I mean, when we start in."

He had brought no food or water, and needed both badly. He drank the
water we supplied him, and ate the bread avidly. The meat he discarded;
he did not know what it was. He shuddered when we told him--as though
to eat it would be cannibalistic.

I rigged a holster around my chest over one shoulder; and another about
my waist, above the drug belt, so that I could carry four automatics
and two or three knives. And with a cartridge belt, I was awkwardly
equipped; I felt like a walking arsenal.

"I can carry some of them," Alt offered.

"No, thank you," I retorted.

He smiled, but made no further comment.

The trip in to Drake, he said, should only take a few hours. We would
find water partway in; we needed little food. Alt suggested one small
bit of bread.

A very casual fellow this! Certainly he hardly believed in
preparedness. Suppose we got lost!

Strange journey! A trip, not of distance, but only of changing size.
There were so many factors to it that I had yet to learn! Alt said
quietly:

"Coming out, I used up my food at once. But going in that is not
necessary." He saw my puzzled expression, and added. "If we put that
piece of bread on a rock beside us, then in a moment there is a
mountain of bread that could feed a thousand."

We were ready at last. Alt needed rest. But he seemed anxious to start
at once.

"Drake bade me hurry."

We had bound his feet; and I found a large pair of shoes for him to
wear over the bandages.

"Can you walk?"

"Yes."

"Try it."

He hobbled along the side of the room, with Foley eying him. His feet
must have been painful; but in a moment he was walking with hardly a
limp.

A likable fellow, this. He said, "I can do it. Besides, I shall be more
clever going in--you will see. Our trip will be easy."

I said good-by to father.

"Remember, dad, keep watch here. Closer than ever. And when we come
back--look for our signal."

A flag of striped black and white which we would wave.

Alt explained the drugs. I would not let him touch them. The belt had
eight compartments on each side. Two drugs, of opposite action. Eight
intensities of each. Small, metallic vials held the tiny pellets.

"Have we enough?" I demanded.

"Oh yes, I think so. Or if we had not, it would be easy to set some
aside, and pick them up again when we were smaller."

We stood in the center of the room on the floor beside the granite
slab. Father sat in a chair. Foley stood regarding us as though we
were ghosts and expecting us to dissolve into nothingness.

I handed Alt a pellet. "This right?"

"Yes."

It was the diminishing drug of the weakest intensity, like the one
Dianne had given us, when in the bedroom we had pursued Togaro that
brief distance into smallness.

"Yes," Alt repeated. "We each take one at the same instant." He touched
me. "There is the great danger that we may become separated from each
other. You understand? Lost in size. You will take none that you do not
give me the same?"

"No," I agreed. Friend or enemy, I could not blame him for being
apprehensive. I had the drugs; he had none. Lost in size--stranded.

We took the pellets. The familiar lurching sensation came as before.
But this time I was prepared for it. I stood quiet, with the swimming
room around me. I was facing the granite slab. It was waist high,
with the rock fragment in its center. The slab seemed lifting;
expanding--and receding. I was presently below it, looking up at its
bottom resting upon the wooden supports.

Alt was unchanged beside me. He said in a moment,

"Your father will lift us up?"

"Yes."

My thoughts went winging off. I was not frightened this time. My heart
was beating normally. A sense of eager exhilaration was on me. Soon we
would reach Drake and Dianne.

I was abruptly aware of Alt plucking at me.

"Your father, he must lift us up!"

The slab was far overhead. At a distance, the wooden pedestal legs rose
like great round columns of some strange, crudely-fashioned temple. I
recall that just at that instant, I had the impression of a tug at my
shoelace. A tiny twitch. But it was driven from my mind. I had no time
to look down. Something gigantic came swooping at me from overhead.
Something monstrous, pink-white, wrapped itself around me.

I was lifted. Squeezed breathless; and snatched up with a dizzy swoop.
Up--a hundred feet it seemed, through the rushing air. Into a glare of
light. And then released.

I saw the great pink-white hairy thing leaving me. It was father's
hand. I staggered dizzily and fell upon a rough expanse of stone.

There are things which one sometimes can remember as being vague,
unimportant impressions. Later, in the light of after events, they
assume importance and one may wonder how they were overlooked at the
time. The tug at my shoelace was such a one. And now, as I fell dizzily
upon the stone slab, there came another. The feeling of something
crawling upon me. As though an insect brushed my bare shoulder. I
thought nothing of it at the time, but later I was to recall it clearly.

I heard a booming voice; father's voice.

"Oh Frank--have I hurt you?"

He had not. But I saw his gigantic hand and arm coming up more slowly
with Alt.

I got to my feet, and looked up. Father's chest and head towered above
me.

I shouted, "No, you did not hurt me. We're all right."

Again Alt plucked at me. "He waited too long! hurry--run!"

We were on a naked expanse of uneven gray rock. It was flooded with
yellow-white light. I saw, a few hundred feet away, a jagged mound of
rock, large as a house. It was expanding, and drawing away from us.

Alt was running, and I ran after him. The expanding ground swayed
beneath me. Alt called back:

"We've got to climb it--and it is getting so large--"

And so far away! I thought that we could not get there over the
shifting, expanding ground. But we made it. The rock was a jagged,
volcanic-looking mound when we reached it. Fifty feet high, at least. I
followed Alt as he climbed up its precipitous slope. I was close under
him; and suddenly I felt that if he were tricking me he had a perfect
opportunity to turn and fling me backward.

"Wait a moment, Alt--let me get past you."

He stopped, and I led him to the summit. It was a long climb. We stood
at last upon a rocky peak--in a yellow sunlight glare. Far down--it
seemed five hundred feet now, at least--a great gray plain spread
off into the distance. I could see a void off there--the edge of the
granite slab. And vague towering shadows of form--father and Foley
perhaps.

The rocks about us were still expanding with their crawling movement. A
summit here, of tumbled naked crags. Fairly near at hand I saw a black
hole--a pit. Alt led me to it. It was, by the time we got there, an
orifice a hundred feet across. A pit of dense blackness, with perfectly
smooth, almost vertical sides.

"We descend into that," said Alt.

My mind flung back. Dianne had used those same words, that night on
Bird's Nest Island. This then, was the pin-point hole at the top of the
rock fragment.

I stood with Alt, waiting. I was winded from the run, and the climb. My
belts--the drugs--and the weapons--were awkward carrying.

Alt said, "If we had started just a little sooner, that climb would
have been easy. We were too small. You see what I mean, using judgment
in the trip?"

I did indeed. We were waiting now for this pit to expand further. The
sides were too steep, too smooth now for descent. But the pit was
widening; the walls were every moment becoming rougher. We had been
quite near, but the expanding ground moved us away. I walked over to
the lip again.

"The idea is to get down as soon as we can," I said.

"Yes," he agreed. "Shall we try it now?"

It seemed that there were places rough enough now to climb down. I had
seen the bottom; it had not been very deep, though dark with shadow.
But it was several hundred feet down now.

We picked our way, sliding perilously at times. We came at last to the
bottom--a level, rocky floor, strewn with bowlders. The place seemed
now a great circular valley, with towering mountainous sides. A haze of
blue distance was overhead for a sky. A pseudo-sunlight was up there;
but here on the valley floor shadows made a queer, unnatural twilight.
I noticed too, a different quality of air. It was dryer, with a vague
metallic sharpness.

"Which way?" I demanded.

The drug we had taken had reached the limit of its effect while we were
descending to the valley pit. The landscape was no longer changing.

A new world already. A barren desolation of rock. I added:

"Do we take more of the drug now?"

Alt stood a moment considering. "There is another descent which I think
we can almost make in a leap. This way--it is not far."

We walked along the valley floor. The heights from which we had come
were beside us. A wildly tumbled volcanic region. There were narrow
rifts, cracks in the bowlder-strewn floor; pits, and tiny craters,
some with upstanding rims, as though lava had welled up and congealed.
Corrugations; ridges; little buttes, and peaks like spires of
needle-point sharpness.

I got the sudden impression that I was very large, and that this was a
landscape all in miniature.

I was walking beside Alt. "How do you know where we should go?"

"Not far from here there is a place like a crescent. It should be--for
our size now--quite small and not very deep. You understand? Easier
for us to jump down into it now, than to make a long climb when we are
smaller."

We rounded the corner of a fallen mass of bowlders, as though here an
avalanche had come tumbling down the valley wall.

"Over there," said Alt. I saw, down a short slope, a small,
crescent-shaped pit, with a span of a few feet. We were some two or
three hundred yards from it.

I was suddenly stricken motionless. I stood gasping, with the shock of
surprise and fear. From the pit, the head and shoulders of a man rose
up. A giant face, malevolently staring. His body filled the pit. His
hands appeared, caught at the rim, and he scrambled out.

And, with a shout, Alt turned and ran at me!




                              CHAPTER XII

                             _The Meeting_


For that instant, I was convinced that I was trapped, lured here by Alt
to this giant lying in ambush. But Alt shouted:

"Run--that is a Togaro man!"

As Alt went past me, I saw his fear-stricken face. The giant--three or
four times my own height--was climbing to his feet. Alt was heading for
the broken cliff wall. I ran after him.

Behind us the giant came with a bound. The cliff was fifty feet
away. Alt shouted back a warning--something about hiding in a small
cave-mouth. There were many small openings; we must get into one too
small for the giant to follow.

There was no time for us to take the drug. No time to do anything but
run. But in a moment I knew we could never make it. I could hear the
thud of the giant's running footsteps, rattling the loose rocks. In a
moment more he would have us.

I shouted: "I can't get there, Alt!"

Alt stopped abruptly. He bent and seized a chunk of rock. Futile stand!
A hundred feet away the giant came leaping. He was larger now.

Then I thought of my automatics. In the shock of this sudden encounter
I had completely forgotten I was armed. I whipped one out, and stood
like a hunter facing a charging elephant. But mine was the trembling
courage of desperation.

The fast-growing giant was forty or fifty feet tall now. My automatic
felt like a toy as I leveled it. I fired; blindly perhaps at the last.
The giant let out a bellow of rage and pain--and astonishment. He
leaped sidewise; he stood fumbling, clutching at his shoulder where my
little bullet had stung him.

Alt shoved me. "This way--run!"

We reached the cliff bottom and found a narrow cleft running back in
the rock wall. It was only a few feet wide, but we wedged into it and
forced our way back a yard or two.

The giant was silent now. In a moment he was outside the crevice, but
he was far too large to get in. We heard him poking about; mumbling to
himself. Then he seemed to be digging, rattling the rocks. His hand and
arm came into the passage probing for us, and I fired again. The report
was deafening in this confined space. Powder fumes choked us.

The giant let out another roar, and his arm, wounded no doubt, was
withdrawn. He vanished. In the silence, we heard the scuffle of his
heavy, retreating footsteps.

We were all but choked; yet we did not dare go out. We crouched,
gasping, and presently the air cleared. There was silence. "Shall we
chance it, Alt? Or get smaller in here?"

"Try outside," he whispered. "I think he is gone--getting large, on his
way up."

We crept from the rift. The valley outside seemed empty. The giant had
vanished. Or was he around here somewhere?

I whispered: "We'd better not move--it might attract his attention."

"No. Wait for a time."

We crouched in the deep shadow of a bowlder. No question of Alt's
loyalty now, and my instinctive liking for him sprang anew.

"That was a close call, Alt."

"Yes."

I added, "You want one of these guns?"

In the gloom I could see his pleased expression. I showed him how to
aim and fire the automatic. He wore a belt to which was strapped a
package of sandwiches and a vacuum of water; I threaded the holster on
it.

We waited, perhaps five or ten minutes, crouching by the rock with the
silent, shadowy valley around us. There was still no sign of the giant.
There were cañons here, into any one of which he might have plunged.
The silence was heavy, oppressive, eerie. A haunted silence, as though
here were things not to be seen or heard, yet nevertheless making their
presence felt.

I whispered at last, "Shall we start?"

"Yes."

I had been lying on my side, raised on one elbow. There came a movement
at my belt; I sensed a tiny indefinable creeping movement upon me. My
hand went down with a swift, instinctive gesture--as one moves with a
startled hand to knock off an insect. And Alt gave a low, sharp cry.

We both saw it at once. As I sat erect, a small human figure which had
been clinging to my belt at the side, scuttled down my leg and leaped
off me to the ground. It vanished in the shadows. We made a hurried,
startled search, but it was gone. We had briefly seen it--a man the
length of my thumbnail.

"Gone, Alt!"

We searched no further. Impossible task to find such a figure here on
these dark rocks.

The thing gave us a shock. We crouched again, waiting, silently
listening. This strangely fearsome journey! Nothing alive save
ourselves, here in this brooding place of rocks. Nothing to see, or to
hear. Yet it seemed as though there might be living multitudes around
us. Humans, not moving in space very far, yet journeying. The giant was
gone. He had passed us, moving on into largeness. This tiny figure
which had been clinging to me was rushing ahead of us perhaps into
smallness.

Alt's voice checked my reverie.

"I think it is safe to go on."

We started off again. The crescent pit we found to be some twenty feet
deep. There was no trouble descending its broken sides.

Alt said: "Coming out, I could have climbed in this size very easily.
But I was smaller. I climbed up here--it seemed a thousand feet."

The giant had evidently been in here, growing, and had waited until the
last moment to scramble out. He had been as surprised as ourselves, no
doubt, at the sudden encounter.

"There must be many of Togaro's men traveling," said Alt. "They are in
every size, traveling, exploring."

This darkling abyss of rocks! I conjured enemies lurking in every
shadow ready to spring upon us. Giants--or tiny humans smaller than
insects. Enemies of every size and of shifting stature.

We kept steadily upon our way. The crescent pit opened into a valley
with towering mountain ranges for its walls. Then we entered a tunnel
mouth. Timing it with unaltering size between one of the pellets, I saw
it as a miniature tunnel which our bodies almost blocked. We followed
it, from one gloomy cavern to another--a distance seemingly only a few
paces. Yet I could envisage that with another pellet it would be a
black march of hours in a vast dark void and a desolation of rocks. An
army of our enemies might be marching here like that now!

We encountered no other Togarites, yet I think that many were passing
close to us in size. Going out, I wondered? If they showed themselves,
father and Foley would make an end to them promptly.

We stopped once and ate our sandwiches, keeping one of them only
against disaster. We finished the water in the vacuum bottle. There was
water now occasionally to be seen in pools on the rocks.

The landscape had been continually changing. The light from overhead
was long since gone. Occasionally we were in some tunnel or cave of
darkness. Yet there always seemed a little light--as though the rocks
themselves were radiating a glow.

The air was changing. A brittle crispness. A dryness. And then,
when at the termination of the effect of our fourth pellet we found
ourselves on a vast metallic plain sloping down into darkness, it
incongruously began to rain. A slow, fine drizzle. Overhead I could see
moving dark clouds.

We came upon a patch of soil, almost barren, but not quite, for there
was sickly vegetation struggling in it. Tiny green things growing.
Clumps of them, with small rock ridges a foot high lying like snakes.

The drizzle was fine as a mist. After a few moments, it ceased.
Abruptly I realized that the puffs of cloud were very small and
close over our heads. And again my whole viewpoint shifted. I was a
tremendous giant standing here, towering to the clouds. A tiny forest
was here at my feet; the ridges were rocky ranges of hills.

I strove to encompass thought of the journey as a whole. We had been
only a few hours. It seemed that we had descended thousands of feet
into the bowels of some vast world of naked rock. Perhaps we had. In
our present size, I am sure the entire trip would have been miles of
distance. Yet to father, up there now in that inconceivable titanic
world, we were still near the surface of the porous rock fragment.

We took another pellet, and the landscape grew.

Alt gripped me. "See--the light!"

A steady red spot of light was visible near by.

Alt said: "Drake's signal."

We saw Drake first. He stood in the growing forest as our dwindling
bodies came down into it. The red light painted his figure as he leaned
against a stunted tree-trunk.

"Frank!"

"Drake--Drake, we see you!"

We adjusted our size. He came running forward. He called back: "Dianne!
Ahlma, Dianne--they've come!"

It was so good to feel his handclasp!

"Father all right, Frank?"

"Yes."

"You've got the rock guarded?"

"Yes, Drake, we--"

And then I saw Dianne. The glory of her beauty swept me. She ran up and
kissed me.

"Frank, dear--"

I do not know what I was to her then. But to me, this was not my
sister. A thousand times more strongly now, I felt it. And no princess
this. Just a girl!




                             CHAPTER XIII

                            _The Stowaway_


We stood in the shadows of the dark forest, with its gnarled, stunted
trees. The red light flamed near by. A dim figure glided up to Drake.
He gave an order; the figure hastened away. In a moment, the red light
vanished.

Drake spoke hurriedly. He and Dianne and Ahlma were leading Alt and me
toward where the red light had been. Drake half whispered:

"We saw you coming--lighted the red signal for Alt. Dangerous to keep
it lighted now; Togaro's flyer has been here. His men--they may be near
this size--would capture our flyer if they could."

We hardly went a hundred yards. To my questions Drake was impatient.
"Presently, Frank. Here, this way."

I saw, in an open space, the dim shape of an interplanetary vehicle. An
elongated globe, forty feet long, with its bulging middle half as wide.
It lay dark and silent; but I saw that it had elliptical windows and a
small doorway which stood open to receive us.

Strange vehicle! As we approached I could see that what I had thought
was a dead-black thing of metal was in reality far different. Drake
hurried us up a small ladder, into its interior. But I saw that the
vehicle's side was not solid.

It seemed rather a myriad woven wires. The thing was a big cage, woven
of intricate metal threads like a basket. Rigid, yet resilient.

I learned afterward some of the details of this strange vehicle.
Standing inert, as it was now, the outer air circulated freely through
it. The wire, of which its hull and all its interior ribs and braces
were composed, was drawn from a ductile metal unknown to our world,
a metal which contracted or expanded freely under the impulse of an
alternation of electronic current. With the current charging it, the
hull became a solid electrical surface, with the entire interior an
active magnetic field, so that ourselves and all the contents of the
vehicle were contracted in size as the hull diminished.

No drugs were needed now. We could use them inside the vehicle merely
to change our size in comparison to the vehicle itself.

There were chemical air-renewers, and heaters to keep the interior warm
against the cold of interplanetary space.

An interplanetary voyage! I could not at first grasp it. No vast space
was here. We were in a dark forest, with a limited mountain valley
around us. No stars were overhead; no great astronomical reaches were
here. Where could this vehicle go? Into smallness, I knew that. But
how? Sail off over these stunted trees? Why, in a moment with any speed
at all it could reach the mountain barrier down which Alt and I had
just come.

But I knew, as I pondered, that if this flyer remained just where it
was, as it diminished in size, sufficient space for any flight would
open up around it.

The door was barred behind us. We passed along a low, narrow passage,
walking on a metal grid of woven wires. I saw small rooms; ladders
leading up and down to other levels. A small room, crowded with strange
instruments faintly throbbing as though all this wired bundle of
mechanism was impatient to be gone.

We came to a little room with a window in the concave side of the hull;
a table of woven wire; and a few wire chairs.

"Sit down," said Drake. "You particularly, Frank--be careful as we
start. Your first voyage! The shock is different from the drug. I see
you brought the weapons?"

"Yes. Do you want them now, Drake?"

"Keep them. We'll look them over presently. Sit quiet, Frank." He spoke
hurriedly, abstractedly. "We must get started at once."

He hastened from the room to give orders for the starting. I had seen
some eight or ten men aboard the vehicle. Four were in the instrument
control room; Drake went in there.

I sat down, with Dianne beside me. Alt was whispering to Ahlma near by.
Dianne murmured:

"Don't talk now--just for a moment."

I sat waiting. This vehicle with its many small rooms; its small
passages, gave me again the impression that I was too large for my
surroundings. Drake had stooped as he went through the arcade into the
adjacent control room.

The dark trees showed motionless outside the window.

Dianne murmured: "Now, Frank."

It was a slow transition. The wire walls of the room turned faintly
luminous. They hummed. A dull red glow suffused everything. The wire
floor, the ceiling, the chair upon which I was sitting, all glowed red,
like wire slowly heating. Red, then yellow, then almost white, with
a cast of violet. But my hand on the chair-arm felt it to be cool as
before.

I was conscious of a slight shock. A lurch. But it was within my head,
for the room did not move. Everything was glowing white. Yet the room
remained dim, for the light did not radiate. There was a throbbing; a
hissing, whining sound of the surging current.

Then the air of the room turned electrical. It faintly snapped;
occasionally in mid-air, a burst of small blue sparks exploded like a
bomb. The outlines of the walls and ceiling and the furniture were lit
with tiny blue lightnings.

Then I felt the real shock. A swoop of all my senses; a second, in
which I thought I was gone, falling, with only the consciousness of
Dianne's firm hand holding me.

A moment, then the shock was passed. I steadied, and found that save
for a queer lightness and a tingling, I felt no different from before.

Dianne murmured: "That's all, Frank; you're past it."

"Yes. Have we started?"

"Oh, yes."

Drake came back. He eyed me appraisingly, but made no comment. He sat
beside us.

"Let's see what weapons you brought. Frank, did you encounter any of
Togaro's people? His flyer brought some out. A few. Not many yet. We
haven't seen Togaro--we don't know where he is. But his expedition is
ready. They don't know that we control the fragment of rock--that they
cannot escape from it. They're coming out."

"If they do, father will stop them."

Drake was willing enough to talk now. He said: "Yes, father will stop
them. That doesn't worry us. But in the atom--in Dianne's world--did
Alt tell you? They've got a single vehicle, like this one, Frank.
They keep it hidden. We can't find it--or haven't been able to, yet.
Togaro's leaders are winning our people, firing them with desire to
conquer the earth."

Dianne said: "When we get there--but, oh, Frank, I'm so glad you've
come!" Her hand lay on mine; her fingers had gone cold. This was no
regal princess--just an apprehensive, frightened little girl. Glad I
had come! The weapons I had brought might be of use in this affair.
But myself--what good could I be, trying to cope with a nation in
revolt? Yet instinctively she turned to me.

"I'm worried, Frank. These are my people--this is my world at stake.
The Togarites are telling our workers that never will they have to work
again."

Drake interrupted passionately: "Dianne has told them they can't
conquer the earth, that we control things up above! But they don't
believe it. So now I'm going to threaten them. A bullet--they'll think
that's magic. A knife thrust--and, Frank, we can't use the size-change
as a weapon in Dianne's world. We dare not grow too large. You'll
understand--you can understand now if you think of it. The Togarites'
leaders have the drugs. They lurk everywhere in a size abnormally
small. Sometimes they grow gigantic. But they dare not get too large.

"You see, we cannot fight them in largeness upon Dianne's little earth.
There is a limit to what is safe. We have avoided such combat, and so
have they. But they are more daring now.

"Their main expedition into largeness is about ready. It's all being
done secretly--Dianne and her government are powerless to stop it.
We think that a multitude of her people are willing to join Togaro's
expedition. The leaders have been waiting for Togaro, but he has not
come."

I said, "Because he's out in our earth-world and can't get in."

"Yes, doubtless. And now they won't wait any longer. The disaster, in
spite of everything Dianne and I have been able to do, is now upon us."

My mind groped with these strange things he was saying. A group of a
hundred or more Togarite leaders had for years been in possession of
the drugs. They had built themselves an interplanetary size-changing
vehicle, like this one in which we were now traveling. They kept it
hidden--in some small size, doubtless. Dianne's controlling government
would have destroyed it, but they could not find it.

The drugs were kept from the public, of course. But these bandit
Togarite leaders had them; and they could not be discovered and
confiscated either.

The Togarites wanted, Drake said, about a half million followers. With
this multitude they would conquer the earth and populate it with their
own race.

"Why?" I demanded. "Why do that?"

My question sounded inane. Drake shrugged. "Why has any conqueror
lusted for power? The original Togarite leaders are evil fellows,
renegades. Togaro himself tried to conquer Dianne's world, and failed.
They want power, riches, plunder. Togaro wants all that. And he
wants--Dianne."

I could feel Dianne stir against me. I said nothing, and in a moment
Drake went on:

"There are ten million of Dianne's people, upon a little globe which
they populate fully. Just the one nation. Perhaps by now the Togarites
have their half million followers. They plan to transport them out--up
to our world--"

"How?" I demanded. "A single flyer, like this, to transport five
hundred thousand people! Why, it would take thousands of trips! Ten or
twenty years--"

But as I said it, I understood why that was not so--and comprehended
the deadly danger to Dianne's world. I began: "If they make their
vehicle large enough to contain half a million people at once--"

I never finished.

Once before, in the room at King's Cove, Ahlma had given a cry to warn
us of impending danger. She did that now. She and Alt were sitting near
us, listening to our words. Drake had previously taken the automatics
from me. We had put them on a vacant chair; one lay on the floor close
by my feet.

I heard Ahlma give a startled cry. The automatic on the floor had been
lying between Drake and me. I remembered clearly where I had placed it,
but it was not there now! I followed Ahlma's glance. The weapon was on
the floor, over by the wall. It was moving--sliding soundlessly toward
the door of the room. I saw that a small human figure was tugging at
it--a man eight or ten inches high As tall as he dared get. The weapon
was larger than himself. He was struggling to drag it to the doorway,
get it beyond our sight.

Ahlma's cry made us all leap to our feet. And Dianne and Ahlma together
recognized the tiny figure.

"Togaro!"

He dropped his burden and scuttled from the room. Dianne gripped me.
"Wait, Frank! You're unsteady yet--you'll hurt yourself."

I found the floor swaying under me as I stood up; I had to drop back.

Drake and Alt dashed into the passage. We could hear their cries
giving the alarm. Several members of the crew came running. The
passages and all the cabins were searched.

Useless! Togaro had taken the diminishing drug. With such a start, he
had escaped into smallness beyond pursuit.

Drake and Alt came back. "It was too dark. We could not see where he
went at all. No use trying to follow him."

Togaro, a stowaway on board!




                              CHAPTER XIV

                           _The Locked Door_


Amazing voyage into smallness! I find an adequate picture of it
difficult to paint. It was, as Drake had said, a voyage shorter in time
than I had been led to expect. Fifteen or twenty hours of elapsed time,
perhaps. We tried to preserve a normality of routine. We ate several
meals, and I tried to sleep. For the remainder of the time we sat in
that small room, by the window; and I gazed at a panorama so singularly
awe-inspiring that I am at a loss now to describe it.

For some time the ship did not seem to move. We sat talking. There
was obviously no movement. The room was steady, save for a humming
vibration. But outside the window things were changing. The forest
trees were sliding upward. Expanding, and drawing away. We were
dwindling faster than an intensity of the drug. Then I felt the ship
lift slightly. We hung poised in a rocky void.

I conjured all manner of wild, gruesome thoughts. Nor were they
all picturing danger to myself or to Dianne's world. Nor even the
threatened conquest of earth. There was a danger that seemed to me now
greater than any of these. Togaro desired Dianne!

I sat close by Dianne. I tried to tell myself that there was nothing to
fear. Togaro would not dare get large, here on our ship. For if he did,
at once we would seize him.

We discussed it. The thing seemed incredible, that he was here so close
to us and we could not find him. Incredible, but true.

We stood at the window, Dianne, Drake, and I. But Alt and Ahlma would
not relax their watching of the room. The ship had been dwindling now
for more than an hour. The forest was gone.

I saw a dark void, in which seemingly we were hanging in mid-air. At
first I thought it was wholly dark. But as I stared, with my eyes--or
perhaps merely my mind--becoming accustomed to this pregnant darkness,
I found that there were things to see.

We hung motionless in the void. But presently rock walls were visible;
how far away I could not guess. Great mountains of rock, expanding,
sliding upward, and drawing away, though they did not vanish. It seemed
that my vision must be sharpening, or that the light was increasing. It
was a queer sort of light--an iridescence, vaguely diffused throughout
everything.

For a long while this went on. The visual sensation was that we were
falling like a swiftly dropping elevator car. But it was not so. The
rock walls were sliding upward, but it was largely an optical illusion.

A meal was served us. The ship was reaching a greater intensity of its
shrinking size, dwindling more rapidly.

I could hear the current rising to a higher, sharper and louder whine.

Drake said, "That's a hundred times faster for us now."

Another few hours. The scene outside was undergoing a progressive
change. The distant rocks constantly had a different aspect. I could
not fathom it--could not define it. A suggestion of roundness. I stared
at the far-away wall. It seemed as though great round things were piled
in loose masses. A wall of bowlders loosely piled.

Once, I fancied that they were in movement--creeping, crawling, one
upon the other. And that all the wall was unsolid. A thing of slow,
ponderous movement.

I became suddenly aware that once more my viewpoint had abruptly
changed. I had envisaged us as a tiny ship, hanging in a great dark
void, with dark round things at some inconceivable distance. And then I
saw it was not so. We were a tremendous ship! These round objects were
tiny particles. Close at hand. Dark, yet glowing. Moving, sliding one
upon the other with a suggestion of fluidity. Nor were they just here
in this one direction. With my face against the window I could see them
overhead. And below. And across the near-by corridor of the ship, a
window there showed them the same on that side.

From everywhere they crowded us. Abruptly it seemed that we were not
in a void, but in a narrow, confined area with these particles jostling
us. They were all of a size--all of a similar aspect. Tiny things, with
space between them. Flowing like a fluid as we pushed our way among
them.

Drake said, "They are molecules, Frank. The molecules of the rock
fragment. We'll soon enter one--and then enter our atom."

I did not answer him. My thoughts went winging off. Millions of
molecules here. Millions? Countless myriads. They shifted and crawled;
jostled; swept past, and away. Then there seemed a darkness as of an
empty void. But always I saw them again.

The scene was always changing. Open space now, with banks like clouds
of the clustering molecules in the distance. I fixed my attention
upon one such cloud. It was coming rapidly nearer--or perhaps we were
speeding toward it. A luminous cloud. It came up and went past. The
molecules were huge and few. I thought perhaps in that group there were
not more than thirty.

Clouds speeding, with dark voids between. Why, this was space! Gigantic
space here.

Then I saw just two of the round things jostle past. And then some
which went by all alone. Giant things now, glowing, unsolid! I began
to think I could see that still other, smaller particles were clinging
together to form each of these unsolid molecules.

I saw one go past, and caught a glimpse of what seemed empty space
within its luminous outline--and then I could almost fancy I saw the
atoms, a whirling swarm of them clustering to make this unsolid outline.

Drake's words rang in my thoughts. Enter one of these molecules? Find
our atom?

I said, "Drake, how can this ship be guided? How in Heaven's name can
we--"

He told me--or tried to tell me. I am no scientist, to put down here
abstruse explanations of a subject so vastly unknown. Nor would I
obtrude them into this narrative. I recall that Drake explained how
by a shifting of gravitational force this vehicle could be guided
for space-flight. That I understood. The bow of the ship made
attractive--to receive the gravitational attraction of whatever masses
of matter lay in that direction. And the stern made repellent, or
neutral, at will. All that I could understand. An interplanetary
flyer, of the sort which often on earth had been contemplated.

The size-change principle was also comprehensible in fundamental
generalities. But how, upon this inward trip, could we search these
myriad molecules for one particular molecule? And then find one atom?
And within that atom find one electron--or a proton, whichever it might
be--within which was a vast reach of astronomical space?

Drake called our guiding instrument a spectrometer--an instrument tuned
to the vibrations of Dianne's world. He spoke of being able to search
out the characteristic spectrum; he spoke of electronic resistance
factors; of the aura of this designated world we sought, its atomic
force which, as we approached it--or receding, went astray--was shown
upon our instrument, thus to guide us.

Let the textbooks explain it. There are many such now being published.
I can record only those things I saw and did. And they, in truth, are
strange enough so that I can only affirm my veracity and let it pass at
that.

Beyond our windows came a void of emptiness, with only occasional
single molecules drifting past. They were always larger. Then I saw
them as objects enormous. Great dark worlds of that unsolid stuff we
call solidity!

Drake insisted that I try and get some sleep. The ship was being
patrolled end to end for any sign of Togaro; but there was none.

Dianne urged, "You must sleep, Frank. We must all keep normal. There
will be so much to do when we arrive."

"Tomorrow," said Drake.

Tomorrow! So incongruous a term! All normality of time or space seemed
gone. But I did try to sleep, and for a while must have done so, for I
dreamed a phantasmagoria of shifting things in a void of blackness.

I wakened to find Drake alone at the window.

"The girls are sleeping, Frank. No sign of Togaro. Sit here by me."

He had an automatic in his hand. We both wore belts of the drugs--and a
belt with holsters for the other weapons.

"Look, Frank."

We had been in the vehicle now some twelve or fifteen hours. I was
astonished when Drake told me I had slept four hours at least. I saw
outside the window now a scene wholly different from before. We had
reached, and been maintaining now for a considerable time, our fastest
rate of diminishing size-change. Much faster than near the beginning
of the voyage, and conceivably faster than the most rapid rate that the
drugs could give.

I gazed in awe from the window. This was astronomical space indeed!
I saw a vast reach of blackness, with blazing stars. Great suns,
resplendent with a corona of flame. White, dull red--some of them
yellow. They lay strewn like gems on a black velvet cloth. Some were in
clusters, faint as luminous dust in the distance. Above us there was a
great band of glittering star-mist, like the Milky Way.

The whole brilliant scene was swift with electronic movement as of
stars. But I realized that our vehicle was not only dwindling, but
sweeping forward in a flight of tremendous speed. The stars went by in
a steady drift. The heavens in advance of us seemed opening up; the
points of light sped past our window and drew together behind us.

Tremendous celestial panorama! I was lost in awe watching it. There
were spaces of blackness devoid of stars. Sometimes, far off to the
side, a lens-shaped cluster would drift past, to be lost in the
distance behind us. A universe of itself. Or a great spiral nebula--I
saw one which with a visible movement seemed rotating.

Then ahead of us another universe would come. A faintly luminous patch.
Spreading wide as we sped toward it--until all in a moment, it seemed,
after crossing an empty void we were again among stars. Great suns
blazing alone. Or binaries, rotating with slow dignity about a common
center of gravity. Or suns, with smaller, dark worlds swinging in
orbits around them. Planets! We could see some of them, shining like
moons in every phase; and some held satellites of their own.

We had for hours been within the atom. And one of these planets,
somewhere here ahead of us, was Dianne's world!

I gazed, and there grew upon me presently the realization of a very
strange aspect to this glittering scene. These blazing worlds were not
large! It caught at my breath, this realization. I regarded a flaming
point off to the side. It was drifting backward. A monstrous world of
incandescent gas, millions of miles off there? I suddenly realized that
was not so. Why, it was a mere pin-point! An enduring spark! It was not
far away, but close outside our window. A monstrous, giant sun--yes.
But our vehicle was still so infinitely larger! Why, this was no vast
reach of space--not compared to us!

I saw us plunge into a myriad points of light. A universe of stars.
But they were still so small in comparison with us, that we crowded
our huge bulk in among them. I saw some of them strike against our
hull--pin-points of fire harmlessly tiny.

We went through an incandescent cloud of them; they bombarded us like
a rain of sparks. We plunged through and came again to a cavern of
emptiness, and then another universe, appearing ahead of us.

I could see now the effect of our dwindling. These sparks were growing,
expanding steadily.

Drake had several times left me to consult the men in the control room.
He said once, as he returned: "You see, Frank, what I mean by haste. We
are chancing it." His tone carried an apprehension. "There are millions
of light-years of distance to be covered in here. That is, they would
be light-years when we were small. While we are large they can be
crossed in a brief time. If we were to wait until we were smaller,
and then make the voyage, this space-flight would take weeks, months
perhaps. Yet we dare not cause too much astronomical disturbance.
We must be normally small before we approach Dianne's world--not to
disturb it in its orbit."

I said, "Are we near there, Drake?"

"Yes, near in time. They've just told me our forward flight must stop.
From here, a size-change only. And then, when we are safely small, a
short voyage--and then we'll land."

"How long, Drake?"

"They said a few hours."

He sat down beside me. The scene outside the window had another, more
familiar aspect now. The side-drift of the stars was stopped. They
were widening out. Shifting both upward and downward, and receding
from us as we grew small among them. I fixed my gaze on one which was
level with our window. It seemed moving away. Drawing away to a great
distance, yet it always remained visually as bright as before. A tiny
spark, growing to a great blazing world.

How long a time passed as I sat there, absorbed, I do not know. Two
hours or more, undoubtedly. Drake occasionally talked, and I answered
him vaguely. They were still diligently searching for Togaro, but it
was a fruitless quest.

I recall that I suggested we might use care in disembarking, so that
Togaro would be kept a prisoner in smallness here on board.

But that was impractical, as Drake at once pointed out. Togaro could
easily make himself an inch high and still be reasonably safe from
our observation. No use for us to guard the vehicle doorway. When our
size-changing current was cut off, the wire hull of the ship was not
solid. A figure an inch high could squeeze out through the side of the
hull very easily. Of what use to guard the door!

"We can't get him, Frank. If he's cautious, handles his size right,
he's safe from us."

Safe from us! But the thought, like an omen, swept me: were we safe
from him?

I said, "Shouldn't the girls wake up by now?"

It seemed that they had been sleeping a very long time; Drake and I had
had another meal served us.

"They went in just before you woke up, Frank. Only three hours--the
rest will do them good--they were worn out."

He had already told me that they were being carefully guarded. But now,
as though it were a premonition, a fear grew upon me.

"Can't we go see them, Drake? Make sure they are all right?"

He gave me a startled glance. "Come on."

I was steady enough on my feet now. We went into the small, dim
passageway. It was whining and throbbing with the electrical sounds of
our size-change. An uproar of rhythmical throbs--one could shout along
here and scarce be heard above it.

As I got to the door, my heart pounded. Their guard was in his place,
fifteen feet down the shadowed passage. But there was something
unnatural in his hunched position as he sat with his back against the
wall. His head seemed to have sunk forward upon his chest. Asleep?

His hand on the floor held the automatic. His head was slumped. I shook
him. His inert body twisted, and fell sidewise. And we saw, sticking in
his chest, a tiny sword like a bodkin plunged skillfully between his
ribs to reach his heart.

Murdered!

The door to the girls' staterooms was closed! We jerked at it. Locked
on the inside. We pounded, shouted, kicked at it frantically.

There was only silence from within.




                              CHAPTER XV

                            _Togaro at Bay_


The silence was horrible. If the girls were in there, why didn't they
answer? We thumped and pounded.

"Dianne! Dianne, answer us! Ahlma--Ahlma--"

Our cries brought members of the crew. The body of the murdered guard
was shoved aside. We jammed the passage, assailing the stout metal door
which was glowing with the current in it.

"Dianne--Dianne dear!"

The door resisted our efforts. We stood listening; I put my ear against
the door.

Only silence. It seemed that even a scream would be less horrible.

"Break it down," exclaimed Drake. "We must hurry!" He flung his
powerful body against it, but the door held. Alt came running with a
metal bar. We rammed. The passage was too narrow to give us room. But
at last the door yielded a little and we got the bar into the crack and
pried.

We burst into the room. Ahlma lay upon the bed, unconscious. Her robe
was torn; there were bruises upon her temple, her shoulder and arm. The
room showed evidences of struggle.

Dianne was gone!

Ahlma had fainted or been knocked unconscious. We revived her
presently. Meanwhile we were searching the room, examining every inch
of it for tiny human forms who might be lurking in the shadows, still
large enough to be visible.

But there was nothing.

"Watch the doorsill!" Drake commanded. "If he's here--he may make a
rush to get out--"

They carried away the body of the murdered guard; two men knelt, with
faces close to the doorsill, watching it.

But there was nothing.

We knew, even before Ahlma revived, what must have happened. Togaro,
with an inch or two of height, armed with a needle-like sword, had
crept upon our guard in the passage. Amazing, reckless villain!

He must have dared to crawl upon the guard; then leaped, plunging his
little sword like a long needle into the guard's heart.

Then he had scuttled into the girls' room, to grow large and softly
close its door. He had fifteen minutes, probably, before we discovered
the murder.

Ahlma revived and told us the rest of it. She had been awakened to
find Togaro--in a size nearly as large as herself--forcing a pellet of
the drug upon Dianne. The girls struggled and fought. Their screams,
barred by the closed door and the humming, throbbing ship, had not been
heard. Togaro had taken the diminishing drug, and forced some of it
upon Dianne. He had struck at Ahlma. Her senses faded. Her last memory
was the sight of Togaro standing in the middle of the floor with Dianne
gripped in his arms. Both he and Dianne were dwindling.

We searched the room again. But we could find nothing.

Were Togaro and Dianne still here? If he was still here, we could keep
him here in smallness. If he had got small in the center of the room it
might be hours, or days of marching to reach the doorway and through it
to the passage, even if he could find his way.

Drake cried, "By heaven, we won't land! I'll keep this ship in space
until we find him! Starve him out--there'll be no food probably, here
in smallness on the floor of this room."

But starve Dianne also! I was shuddering. Dianne here--down here by my
feet perhaps--here with Togaro, hiding or wandering in some desolate
abyss of smallness. Or perhaps we had already trodden upon them!

We stood with sudden terror, hardly daring to move. But were they here?
I said, "Let's try getting small, Drake. We've got to try something.
Get small here--in the center of the room where Ahlma says she saw
them. Search for them. Drake, we've got to get her away from him!"

I was talking wildly and I knew it. Drake gripped me.

"Wait, let's try and figure it out. Easy, Frank--don't let's lose our
wits."

It seemed as though every moment was vital. I stood listening to
Drake's theory. Theory, at such a time! A surge of self-condemnation
was upon me. If only I had had the sense to stay close by Dianne!

Drake was trying to estimate what Togaro had done. This door had been
barred on the inside. But there was a crack under the bottom of the
door an eighth of an inch high, at least. Drake closed the door for a
moment and showed me it.

"Frank, they could be anywhere. Not here in the room--he wouldn't stay
here in the room--he had fifteen minutes maybe."

With sinking heart I realized how easily he could have escaped out of
here. He and Dianne, diminishing say to an inch. Then walking to the
locked door. Dwindling again--walking, carrying Dianne--through the
crack under the door.

He had had fifteen minutes--and another fifteen had now passed. He
could indeed be almost anywhere in the ship.

There was a sound near by--a scream! Not that exactly. A shout. It
sounded above the throbbing, humming of the ship.

We stood frozen, listening.

"Drake, you heard it? Where was it?"

He murmured, "What was it? A voice--"

Not in this cabin. We stood listening in the doorway. Diagonally along
the passage on the other side was the door to another small cabin. It
stood open. Had the shout come from there? We had searched all the
cabins ten minutes before. We did not dare move without extreme care.
An incautious step might crush Dianne.

There was a guard out here in the passage. All the crew were forbidden
to move except with the greatest circumspection. The guard said, "It
sounded in there. Shall I go?"

A moment of waiting. I murmured, "Drake, over there."

It came again, unmistakably from that opposite cabin. A single shouted
word, but we heard it.

"Frank!"

Dianne's voice!

We rushed. No need for caution now. Hardly more than a dozen steps to
that open cabin doorway. But as we reached it, the heavy door clanged
violently in our faces!

We stood baffled. We shouted. "Dianne! Dianne, are you in there?"

From behind the barred door came Togaro's jeering, sardonic laughter.

"We are here. Come in and get us--if you dare!"




                              CHAPTER XVI

                            _Frank's Plan_


This door, like the other, resisted our efforts, to smash it. Alt ran
to get the bar.

We called, "Dianne!"

She did not answer. With my ear against the door, it seemed that I
could hear a movement inside.

"Dianne! If you can speak, answer me!"

I thought I could hear a low, gruff murmur. I demanded, "Togaro! Open
the door!"

No answer.

Drake shouted, "Damn it, we'll break it down! Here, give me that bar!"

We assaulted the door. In the silence between our blows, Togaro's
mocking laugh sounded again. It chilled me; horrible, sardonic,
confident laughter.

The door began yielding. I warned, "Drake, your automatic."

He handed the bar to Alt and the two men of the ship's crew who had
joined us. Ahlma, white and trembling, but eager, stood among us. Drake
swept her behind him. He and I stood with weapons ready.

"Now, Alt."

With a last blow the door fell inward. From where we crowded in the
passage the front portion of the little cabin was exposed. The huge
legs of Togaro were bent like a jackknife as he sat wedged in the room!
We could see at first only the lower half of him.

Drake jumped into the doorway; his weapon went up. Togaro's voice
sounded--a dull gruff roar.

"Wait, you fool! Do not kill me!"

It checked, for that instant, the shot that Drake might have fired. I
was beside Drake now. The whole interior of the cabin was filled with
the huge body of Togaro. He sat sidewise to the door. The knees of his
bent legs were nearly as high as our heads. His back was jammed against
the stateroom bunk; his head as he sat hunched forward, crowded the
ceiling. His body was wedged solid into the little room.

And upon his lap, held against his chest, Dianne was standing upright.
Her head came hardly to his bent shoulders. His arm encircled her.

The scene froze us for an instant. The giant, evil face of Togaro,
above Dianne's head, leered down at us.

He said, "Do not kill me! Do not dare! Dianne, tell them to talk to
me--not to shoot."

I met Dianne's gaze. Her size in relation to me, was about normal. Her
face was pale, but she seemed unhurt. She gasped.

"Frank--Drake--don't try to kill him--you don't understand--"

Why not kill him? He was holding Dianne in front of him--but from where
I stood I could have sent a bullet into his brain and not endangered
Dianne.

Or would his death throes have crushed her? I did not dare fire, yet.
Drake felt the same. He lowered his weapon; he pushed mine down.

"Wait a minute, Frank. Easy."

Togaro's smile widened. His broad, heavy face had a look of monstrous
evil. He said, "Why, that is better. Now we will talk."

"What do you want to say?" Drake demanded. "Let Dianne go. Dianne,
climb down--"

It brought a gibe. "How can she climb down?"

I said, "We've got you. I can put a bullet into your head in a second.
Do you know what a bullet is?"

"I know. Yes, young man, I know very well. But you won't do that.
Quiet, Dianne--stand quiet, I am not hurting you."

His tone changed wholly as he admonished her. Ironic, to me; gentle,
solicitous, and yet ironic also, to her.

I threatened, "But I will! We'll give you one minute!"

Drake pushed me back. "What have you got to say, Togaro? You're caught.
You can't get smaller--we can kill you in an instant with these deadly
weapons. You can't hurt us."

He was indeed so wedged into the cabin that he could scarcely move. But
Drake was making empty threats. Togaro interrupted him calmly, "Can't
hurt you! But you cannot kill me so fast that I will not also kill
Dianne. Crush her to death; here in my arms. Quiet, sweet one, I am
not crushing you--yet."

We saw now that Togaro's hand held a pellet of the drug, a pellet
expanded to the size of a marble. He showed it to us.

"The enlarging drug. I think I can get it into my mouth, Drake, before
you can kill me. It will be effective ten minutes at least after my
death. Did you know that? Ten minutes of my body growing, here in this
small room--"

He left the sentence to our imagination. Across his huge lap the cabin
window was visible. Outside it I could glimpse the black void of
space--a dull-red crescent hung out there, with white stars blazing
around it.

Our ship was here in space. A growth of Togaro's body, and he would
burst the roof of this cabin and wreck the ship.

Drake stammered, "But you--you would not dare--"

"Nor would you," Togaro returned calmly. "You do not want me to crush
Dianne. Or break this tiny ship and kill us all. I do not want it. Fear
nothing, I am no more anxious to die than you. There is of it nothing
for you to fear. I would not like to hurt my little Dianne." His hand
encompassed the span of her shoulder and back with a gesture like a
caress.

We knew we were defeated. Drake said, "Yes. What do you want?"

"Go now and tell them in the control room to land as soon as possible.
That is simple."

Drake turned away. "You watch here, Frank. Keep him covered."

I stood, a few moments later, in the passage whispering with Drake. We
had an hour of grace. Togaro, from the window beside him, could see our
progress toward landing. We did not dare do anything else with the ship.

But there was an hour. And I had a plan. Desperate; to me, with my
inexperience in these strange conditions, it was a plan incredibly
awesome. Yet I could think of nothing else which might be done. A plan
by which I might rescue Dianne and kill Togaro.

I whispered it to Drake.

He said at last, "Yes, I guess it's the only thing. You think I should
go with you? Two of us--"

"No. The chances are better with one."

"Then I will try it," he said. But I shook my head.

We stood out of Togaro's sight and hearing. Ahlma was with us.

Ahlma said, "But, Frank, you are not used to it. If you would trust it
to a girl--"

But that was not feasible. Drake would have been better than I, no
doubt.

"If I do not come back," I urged, "you, Drake, are needed here. And
when the ship lands--it is you who are needed, not I."

It seemed the best thing to do. I had an hour before the landing. And I
was ready now. I needed no preparations. I wore my belt of the drugs; I
carried a knife like a short sword.

I edged up as close to the doorway of Togaro's cabin as I could get
without his seeing me.

I took the diminishing drug.




                             CHAPTER XVII

                          _The Tiny Prowler_


"Good-by, Frank," Drake reached carefully down and touched my dwindling
shoulder with the tip of his finger. "Be cautious--don't take too many
chances."

"No."

"Remember--if he once sees you--well, that's the end, Frank."

I called softly upward. "I'll be careful. You give me the signal,
Drake, when you think I'm small enough to start toward him. And
remember the plan. If I can distract his attention--if Dianne leaps
away--you shoot him."

I was already not much higher than Drake's shoe top. The passage floor
was in shadow. The wall was drawing away from me.

I had taken what was perhaps half of one of the pellets of the weakest
intensity. Its effect was gone in a minute or two. I stood quiet,
trying to judge my height compared to Drake; and waiting for his signal
to tell me that I was small enough to dare advance into Togaro's
doorway.

A scene of singular strangeness, here on the floor of the shadowed
passageway! The floor was a grid, or grill of laced metal. I saw it
now as a spread of level surface; girders three feet wide, with others
crossing to checker it into squares--three-foot squares, each of them
a black abyss. The perpendicular passage wall was fifty feet from me.
The other way, I could see Drake's monstrous figure; it blurred up into
the distance overhead. I gazed, trying to estimate his apparent height.
Four hundred feet tall, or more. Beyond him--it seemed a quarter of a
mile at least--there was the blur of Ahlma's robe.

I concluded that to Drake I was about an inch high. I saw him move; as
though some great dark mountain were falling upon me, his body stooped
above me. His hand came slowly down; his palm spread like a pink-white
roof close over my head. And then swooped upward; I could feel the
suction-wind as it rose.

It was our agreed-upon signal. With my heart pounding I turned toward
the cliff which was the passage wall. I walked, half ran upon one of
the broad metal girders.

I came to the wall; followed one of the girders going lengthwise of the
passage. This huge passage! A vaulted, shadowed place five hundred feet
across, and twice as high.

Ahead of me the cliff ended in a great opening. Togaro's doorway! I
stopped at the edge of it; stood cautiously peering. I could see into
the gigantic room. Togaro's back seemed half turned to me. I could
distinguish only his foot and leg. The blur of his body showed in the
upper distance; and Dianne up there--a dim golden blur of her robe.

I took a few more steps. It was several hundred yards into the room to
reach that huge foot.

But in my present size I could not cross the threshold without the
chance of his seeing me. I had nearly an hour; I decided to get smaller.

A taste of the drug. The girder beneath my feet widened until it was a
broad, rough metal roadway.

Space above me and to the sides was so great I seemed almost in the
open. Ahead in the distance there were dim blurs of shape. And there
seemed occasionally the muffled rumble of monstrous voices.

I ran until I was winded, then walked. How far, I have no idea. It
seemed, altogether, a mile or more. The roadway ended in a great spread
of rough metal surface. I climbed a gentle slope like a mound, passed
over it and descended.

The threshold! I was in the room.

I had been advancing toward the mountainous outlines which were
Togaro's body. I came near them now. He wore rough cloth trousers. The
corrugations of them were tremendous fantastic ridges of gray surface
rising into the air.

I stood again trying to fathom just where I was, and what I might do. I
was still a considerable distance from where those billowing folds of
cloth rested upon this metal ground. I ran again, then walked to get
my wind. I was already tired. The gray mountain was at hand. I think I
was behind Togaro. The folds of his trousers rose in an almost formless
shape to where, several hundred feet up, I thought might be the line of
his belt.

I stood beside his leg. I even touched him. The cloth was like woven
strands of rope. Each strand was rough with dangling edges.

I put my hand upon one strand. It was as thick as the rope that ties an
ocean steamship to its dock. There were spaces here into which my whole
arm would go.

I set my foot into an opening. I could climb this! I gripped one of the
strands. I swung myself up.

Then realization came to me. Why, this was madness! There was five
hundred feet of height above me, and then I would only reach the ledge
which was Togaro's belt. All this time his least movement would fling
me off, plunge me to my death.

Madness! I let go, and leaped backward to the ground. I would have to
get larger.

I took a cautious taste of the enlarging drug, then another.

The scene around me, with its steady dwindling, began to rationalize.
I found myself standing behind Togaro, in the curve between him and
the stateroom bunk. His waistline came down. I thought that presently
with a leap I might reach up and seize his belt. Or in a moment I would
be able to climb into the bunk. And from there perhaps leap upon his
shoulder.

I had, for a long time past, been aware of various sounds. I had heard
Drake's voice in the passage, talking, I thought, with Togaro.

The expanding drug action ceased. I drew my sword. I was now, I think,
compared to Togaro, a foot possibly in height. There were sounds--a
confusion of them--in the air. Voices, blurred by the mingled throb and
hum of the ship.

But abruptly they all changed. A silence. The new sounds--a clanging,
and a sudden voice! Drake's voice:

"Dianne! Togaro! Sit still or I'll kill you--"

I was stricken. Togaro's great body, with Dianne clutched to him, was
heaving, rising.

He lurched backward, almost to crush me. Drake shouted again, but
his words were lost in the turmoil. It seemed that all the world was
crashing about me--rending, tearing crashes.

I leaped upward. My sword dropped as I clutched frantically to keep
from falling. I caught at a great leather band, wedged my arm under it
and clung.

I felt myself heaved monstrously into the air.




                             CHAPTER XVIII

                        _The Escape of Togaro_


It was an anxious time for Drake, this hour during which he was waiting
for me to make my attack on Togaro. He stood, with Ahlma behind him,
watching me dwindle. Then he stooped, cautiously keeping back where
Togaro could not see him, and gave me the signal.

I was about an inch high, down by his shoe. His gaze followed me as I
ran toward the doorway. In the shadows there he saw me getting still
smaller, until I was lost to his sight.

Drake whispered to Ahlma, "We must act naturally." He put his arm
around her in his apprehension for Dianne and me and the knowledge that
there was disaster ahead for us all. "Ahlma."

She whispered, "Drake!"

They could find no words, but needed none. For a moment he held her,
kissed her; saw in her misty eyes an answer to the tumult of his heart.

"We must be alert, Drake. Be ready for what may come." She turned
abruptly and called into the ship, "Frank! Oh, Frank, you go to the
control room and tell them again to hasten our landing. Drake and I
will watch here." Calling so that Togaro would hear her and not be
suspicious that I was not in evidence!

Drake whispered, "Good idea!"

Alt came up. He said aloud, "The ship is diminishing very fast. We will
be there soon." He added, in a whisper, "He is gone?"

"Yes. Stay here with us."

The minutes dragged by. Togaro sat quiet; he held Dianne close to
him; occasionally he spoke to her. Sometimes he would command Drake,
"Remember, when we land--if you do not try to harm me, Dianne will be
safe."

Through the windows Dianne's world was constantly visible. It lay
now beneath the ship--a great spread of convex, red-brown surface.
The light of its parent sun gleamed upon the mountain tops. The
configurations of the land and water areas were plainly visible, save
where, in patches, cloud masses obscured them.

The vehicle presently was dwindling quite slowly; then its size-change
ceased. It dropped swiftly down toward the globe's surface.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are a few brief astronomical details which I think I should
record. When Drake and the ship landed now upon this little globe Drake
was normal in size to its inhabitants. Calling him then his earthly
standard of six feet tall, a comparative set of measurements may be
given of this atomic world.

You who read this can visualize only by earthly standards. That is
natural, for to the human mind the conception of one's self is the
starting point of every comparison. During all these events I recall
that I almost always felt myself to be my original, normal size. I saw
landscapes which were huge, and landscapes small as children's toys.

But always I felt myself to be Frank Ferrule, five feet seven inches
tall. Thus quaintly egotistical is the human viewpoint; to each man is
his own mind the pivot of the universe.

Dianne's earth within the atom, then, you may visualize as a globe with
a diameter of about three hundred miles. A circumference something
over nine hundred miles. Its inhabitants were far larger, therefore,
in comparison to their globe, than we are to our earth. To them it was
indeed a little world--small as an asteroid would be to us.

It was called, in the native language, "Mita." A blazing sun was near
it--twenty million miles away, perhaps--and Mita was the only planet.
It rotated on its axis with a revolution of about six hours and forty
minutes; so that, as we experienced the passage of time, the equal days
and nights were each about three and a third hours in duration.

There was a slight inclination of its axis--a progression of seasons
with a cycle of some three months. There was one small but brilliant
moon.

Again, I can only say that textbooks are now being filled with the
astronomical technicalities of the planet Mita. I record only such few
stray facts as may make my narrative more understandable.

There was, for instance, the gravity as we felt it on Mita. In spite
of the globe's smallness, its inhabitants felt a gravitational pull
not much different than we feel it on earth. This was caused by the
planet's tremendous density. A solid little globe of heavy, metallic
rock.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was night when the vehicle dropped through Mita's atmosphere,
heading for the largest city of the world's single nation. Drake stood
in the passageway within sight of Togaro and Dianne. There was a window
near him. Through it he could see the landscape as it rose and visibly
expanded until presently it seemed close underneath the ship. The
sunlight had faded from the sky when the ship entered Mita's shadow. It
showed now as a line of red-yellow light on distant mountain tops. A
fading light--the sunset, with the brief night just beginning. The sea
was off there beyond the mountains; and again a line of ocean showed in
the opposite direction.

Directly beneath the ship was an island-continent. A land-locked lake
with many islands was near its center. A curving reach of lakeshore
showed a patch of checkered, shadowed surface which was the city.
Overhead a half moon was hanging.

Drake still had Ahlma and Alt beside him. They were watching
Togaro--pretending to watch him, but in reality their anxious gazes
were searching for me. I was, I think, at about this time lurking
behind Togaro. I had reached a size where Drake could have seen me, of
course, had he dared advance into the doorway and look; but he did not.

Increasing apprehension swept Drake. The time was growing short. He had
ordered the ship to land. It was already filled with the preparatory
sounds: the voices of the navigators in the control room giving orders,
the rattle and clank of moving chains, the opening of a side door for
disembarking.

Drake's apprehension grew into a panic. He had thought, of course, that
I would make an attack before this. He did not dare now give orders to
have the ship kept in the air. Togaro was watching through the window
at his side--his glance darting out there and then back at Drake. The
giant held Dianne's small form close against his chest.

He had admonished her not to speak. He kept her face turned now from
the doorway, with his huge arm encircling her. And he forced her to
reach up and with her tiny hands clutch at the collar of his shirt.

Through the window there was presently the close-at-hand moonlit vista
of the lake, the shore front, and the city buildings. Drake saw the
familiar landing-space. It came swiftly mounting, only a few hundred
feet down now. A crowd of people, dark figures edged with silver
moonlight, stood gazing up at the dropping ship.

Ahlma murmured, "What can we do?"

A sudden confusion gripped them. The ship was landing! To Drake it
unreasonably seemed as though this sudden crisis had plunged upon him
all unawares. He had waited too long for me.

Horror swept him now. Togaro's hand went to his mouth. He took the
enlarging drug! A clanging resounded through the ship. It tilted,
thumped slightly, came to rest upon the ground. For perhaps five
seconds the three in the passageway stood transfixed with horror. Then
Drake shouted:

"Dianne! Togaro, sit still, or I'll kill you!"

But it meant nothing, and Drake knew it. He gripped Ahlma and Alt, and
flung them back against the passage wall, staring with futile, helpless
horror.

The already huge body of Togaro was expanding. But already he filled
the small cabin. He lunged, heaved his shoulders up against the ceiling.

Drake shouted again, with more rationality this time. "Togaro, don't
hurt Dianne!"

Togaro panted, "No!"

He held her in the protecting hollow of his arm. He rose, straining
his shoulders once again against the ceiling in a monstrous lunge. The
ceiling broke.

Togaro stood a moment in the wreckage, expanding until only his giant
legs remained in the cabin. Then he leaped upward. With a single
jump he cleared the ship and landed upon the ground, scattering the
terror-stricken crowd.

A growing giant, with huge bounds he fled away down a moonlit road
toward the lake. The crowd on the landing field, staring after him, saw
the small figure of Dianne hanging to his neck.

At the back of his waistline they saw a far smaller figure. It was
I--clinging desperately to his belt, riding him like a clutching insect
of whose presence he was unaware!




                              CHAPTER XIX

                          _Night of Turmoil_


Drake hurried with Ahlma and Alt from the ship. It was a scene of wild
confusion as the frightened crowd milled over the moonlit field. In the
distance the figure of the running Togaro loomed, a huge dark shape
towering over the landscape. This little world was visibly convex: the
horizon was very close. Drake could see Togaro bounding along the road
which followed the lakeshore, beyond the city outskirts. His giant
figure sank lower until presently it was gone below the horizon.

The crowd, which had been watching the giant, redoubled its confusion.
Men and women were here; even a few children were held aloft to keep
from being trampled. The near-by throng surged upon Drake.

Alt gasped, "They saw a man hanging to Togaro. Very small."

"Frank!"

"Move--back--" Alt began in English, then burst into a flood of his
native language.

The crowd was pressing close upon them. Drake had all he could do to
protect Ahlma from the roughly surging people. They were all about
Alt's size--men bare-headed and barelegged, with jackets long to the
knee, flaring like a skirt; women, some of them dressed like the men,
but with hair bound on their heads, or young girls with longer skirts
and flowing hair.

Drake, who wore the native costume, with a band about his forehead
to hold his hair from his eyes, stood head and shoulders above the
crowd. He held an arm about Ahlma, and struggled to force his way
across the field. His instinct had been to take the enlarging drug and
follow Togaro. But that was not practical. Togaro, always able to be
the larger, could have turned upon him. And with Dianne in Togaro's
arms--and now myself, so tiny, clinging to him--Drake realized that any
combat would only kill us both.

"Ahlma, we must get over to the field-house."

"Yes, Drake."

"See the officials. There should be some one here to meet us."

The crowd had seen the ship descending and had gathered. The officials
were here. Drake saw a line of the native police guarding the ship, and
at the little field-house there were others.

Alt said, "There is Jain." He called to the official, a huge
black-coated fellow. Drake knew him; and he spoke English.

Drake said to Ahlma, "Everyone's frightened. Give way there!"

But the crowd was more than frightened. Menacing, Drake abruptly
realized, as two men roughly plucked at him.

"The drugs!" Ahlma gasped. "They want the drugs."

Jain came wading forward, bellowing with the voice of authority which
now the crowd began to obey.

Drake called, "I don't want to hurt them." He was far stronger than any
of these people, and he was armed, both with the drugs and the weapons
I had brought. But this was a crowd of Dianne's people.

Drake had lived among them for a year; he knew them well, and they knew
him. They were an excitable people; in a panic of terror now at the
sight of the giant Togaro. Drake had no wish to do anything to excite
them further.

He shouted with what he hoped would be reassuring words. Alt shouted in
his own language. They forced their way forward.

The mob presently began dispersing. Jain led Drake into the
field-house, a small building of metallic blocks. Other officials were
here. There was a hurried consultation.

Then a conveyance arrived--a long, low wagon on rollers, with a covered
top and a line of small animals to pull it. They climbed aboard and
rumbled off through the city streets to the palace of Dianne.

I never saw, except with fleeting glimpses, this Shore City, as its
name might be translated into English; nor Dianne's palace, nor any of
her loyal people, the Mitans, as the nation was called.

To Drake it was all familiar. He had attained a position of authority.
The ruling class--those who were born with the crescent patch on their
foreheads--had accepted him as one of them. Dianne, headstrong little
ruler, had insisted upon going in the flyer when Alt was sent out into
largeness. Now, in spite of Drake's efforts to guard her, she had been
taken by Togaro.

Jain was very solemn. "The council will blame you, Drake."

They could not blame Drake more than he blamed himself. Yet, from that
moment Togaro held Dianne in his arms there was nothing Drake could
have done.

And nothing now that he could think of to do. He sat immersed in gloomy
thoughts. For all his year among these people it was still a strange
world to him. He said suddenly: "Jain, that was my brother clinging to
Togaro. We've got to find where they went."

Jain was solemn, but there was an excited triumph upon him. For months
now the Togarites had kept hidden in smallness. Their headquarters--the
place where they kept their interplanetary ship--could not be found.
The Mitans had searched. Thousands of organized searchers were
scattered everywhere throughout the land. For months no Togarite giant
had ever appeared.

But now Togaro's arrival would disclose where his followers lurked.

"We will get the news at the palace, Drake. We'll know now--and we will
organize an army, with the drugs and your weapons, and go after them,
Drake. We will get them now!"

It was a ride of no more than ten minutes. The narrow city streets
were lined with low houses, all built of metallic blocks. There were
few lights, for the night was cloudless and the brilliant moon bathed
everything with silver.

The city was in a turmoil. Crowds thronged the streets, milling and
shoving and shouting.

The cart nosed its way along. The identity of its occupants was known.
Drake often heard his name shouted. The crowd opened for the cart, but
closed in behind, and followed it.

They wound up a hill, and entered the tree-shrouded gardens of the
palace. It was a scene of almost normal earthly beauty, with paths
and flowers, and low-stunted trees, heavy with redolent blossoms, all
shining in the white moonlight, with a gentle warm nightbreeze from the
lake.

The palace was a long building some forty feet in height, overgrown
with climbing plants like some ancient castle of earth. Two stories,
and a queer dome roof like the crown of a helmet surmounted by a
needle-spire. There was a single broad doorway up a short flight of
stone steps. The lower windows at the ground level were barred. But
overhead was a broad balcony with a metal railing, with open doors and
windows giving access to the second floor rooms.

The palace faced the garden on this side, and on the other stood sheer
upon the brink of a cliff--a perpendicular rocky wall, a hundred feet
down, at the bottom of which the waters of the lake lapped on a narrow
rocky beach.

As the cart rumbled across the garden, Drake caught a glimpse of the
lake beyond the corner of the building. A moonlit spread of placid
water, sharply convex. At the near horizon a green island loomed in the
moonlight. The cart stopped, and they hurried into the palace.

The garden behind them was jammed with the arriving mob. A silent,
gathering throng. Ominously silent.




                              CHAPTER XX

                     _In the Blood Light of Dawn_


Drake leaped to his feet. "But this must be stopped! Good God, this is
madness!"

An hour or more had passed. The brief night was more than half over.
Drake had sat in the palace with the harassed council. Night of
turmoil! This brief night, preface to the end.

It seemed as though all the city sensed it. The crowds were in a wild
chaos, surging everywhere throughout the city. Aimless, leaderless mobs.

The government, too, was in chaos, striving to do a multiplicity of
abnormal things at once. A welter of official activities was around
Drake. He sat watching and listening, waiting an opportunity to take
his part in the one thing most vital to him--the expedition which soon
was to start upon the rescue of the Princess Dianne, and the capture of
the Togarites.

The whereabouts of the enemy was known now. The island at the near-by
horizon held them. It was no more than three miles away across the
water. A public garden and park occupied this small island. No one
lived there, but pleasure parties often went to spend a few hours. The
island had been searched many times and nothing found.

Yet it was Togaro's headquarters, quite evidently. His giant form had
been seen wading out there. He was there now. Drake from the palace
balcony had stood and seen the towering figure in the moonlight. And
then it had dwindled. In smallness there, beyond doubt, the Togarite
ship was hidden. He and his leaders were there.

Drake listened to the council making its plans. An expedition of
young men who had been trained in the use of the drugs was now being
assembled. They were coming into the palace now, in groups, as the
messengers sought them out in the city and brought them.

There seemed only one way to get to the island unperceived by Togaro.
The space-ship in which Drake had arrived was being hastily repaired.
In an hour or two it would be ready. A hundred young men, and Drake
with his automatics, would board it. The ship would then dwindle to a
size very small. It would seem a flight of miles to the island--but the
ship could do that in a brief time. And in such a small size could land
unobserved.

The cause of the turmoil in the city was puzzling and disturbing to the
council. The arrival of Togaro had created an excitement almost verging
upon panic. But the excitement had started before Togaro's arrival. All
during the three-hour daylight preceding, and the night before that, a
strange air of unrest had been apparent among the people. There were
fifty thousand of them here. The near-by rural districts held another
fifty thousand. There was an influx from the country into the city. No
one knew why. Whole families coming in their carts, then abandoning the
carts, and mingling with the city crowds.

Messengers arriving from other cities reported the same conditions.
The people everywhere were frightened, acting strangely. The small
government flyer came on its four-hundred-mile voyage from the other
side of the globe. It was mostly water in that hemisphere; but there
was one island--one large city. It, too, was in a turmoil.

A strange restlessness, which the panic here in the Shore City over
Togaro's arrival could not explain, pervaded Mita. To Drake it was as
though by some occult force the knowledge was spreading throughout the
world of impending doom. But he knew it was nothing occult. Might it
not be that Togaro's followers were dispersed widely over this little
globe, mingling with the people, spreading insidious, frightening
propaganda?

The minutes passed while Drake sat watching the arriving men whom he
was to lead. The council room was in the upper story. The men came up,
were checked and given instructions, and then taken to the lower floor
to be equipped with belts and the drugs.

Word came that the space-ship was not badly damaged. The repairs were
progressing. It would be ready for the voyage by dawn.

All this time, in the garden of the palace the mob had stood
unnaturally silent, watching the building as though trying to guess
what activities were going on inside. Messengers were constantly
arriving and departing. Police were bringing in the young men whom
Drake was to take into smallness. The airship from the other hemisphere
came and landed near by; its officials hurried in through the police
cordon at the palace doorway.

As though nature were conspiring with a premonition of what the future
might hold, a cloud lifted above the horizon across the city and
passed near the moon; a cloud at a considerable altitude, tinged with
red from the coming sunrise. It threw a red cast upon the moon. The
moonlight suddenly seemed drenching all the scene with blood. An omen?
Drake shuddered. He turned from the window. But the murmur down there
grew to a shouting. It brought his gaze back. A rhythmic shouting--the
repetition of a few words over and over. It may have started with a
single voice, and the crowd took it up like a chant.

"Alt, what is that?"

Alt was near Drake. He listened. But Ahlma caught it first.

"They say, '_The world ends tonight! Give us the drugs!_'"

Like a chant the crowd was all shouting it now. "_The world ends
tonight! We want the drugs!_"

The council heard it. A silence fell upon the room as they listened.
Then from the palace doorway, the police began shouting. A new turmoil,
then the sound of thuds upon the front palace walls--missiles were
being thrown. A chunk of rock came hurtling through the window. It
narrowly missed Drake and fell with a crash in the midst of the sitting
councilmen.

It was then Drake leaped to his feet. "But this must be stopped! This
is madness!"

The mob was attacking the palace doorway. It surged at the foot of the
steps. A rain of rocks came hurtling upward.

Drake shouted, "Jain, tell the council I'm going to get large! I'll
disperse this mob--Ahlma, you come with me! You can talk to them--try
to calm them! Tell them you are speaking for your princess."

A turmoil almost equal to the confusion in the garden now broke out in
the council room. The men were all on their feet, jabbering excitedly.

Jain shouted, "No! They say no, Drake--"

Drake was spurred by the feeling of helplessness that had made him
stand by and watch Togaro escape with Dianne.

He handed Ahlma a pellet. Alt pleaded, "Let me come with you."

Before the council could move to stop them, all three had taken the
drug. The room began dwindling. It struck a sudden calmness to Drake.
He said:

"Alt, we must get out of here! Tell the council we will not get very
large. Only enough to disperse this mob. That can do no harm. Togaro
knows we are here--if he sees us, what matter? Tell them we'll be small
again soon--I'll be ready to go when the flyer is ready."

Alt shouted his translation. The balcony doorway was already shrunk to
Drake's waist. He pushed Ahlma through and squeezed through himself
with Alt after them.

At sight of them the crowd gave a roar of mingled surprise and fear.
The fighting at the palace steps was instantly checked. The crowd stood
and gazed. Surprise; awe; terror. It froze them.

There was a total silence. Drake gazed down, and then with a moment of
dizziness looked away. The palace was shrinking. He presently reached
up and gripped its spire at the peak of the roof. With his other hand
drew from his belt pellets of the other drug.

Drake had had much experience with the drugs, each an antidote to the
other; he knew how to check his growth at any point. He checked it now,
and Ahlma and Alt did the same.

They stood precariously upon a tiny balcony of a toy house whose spire
was not much taller than their heads. A few feet beneath them, hardly
more than a comfortable step down, was the miniature garden. Little
trees, bathed in the blood-light of the moon, and small human figures.

The balcony strained and swayed beneath the weight. Drake said, "We
must step down. Alt, call down to them, tell them to give us room."

Alt's voice spurred the crowd to action. The spell which had struck
them motionless was broken. A woman screamed. The crowd took it
up--frenzied screams. In panic, they turned and shoved, fought,
screaming to get away.

But the adjacent streets were packed with people. The crowd from the
garden pressed at them.

The balcony was breaking. This toy house; these toy people!

Drake said, "Step down, Ahlma."

There was room beneath them now: They stepped from the balcony, and
stood together beside the little palace, with the garden down at their
shoe-tops. The crowd in a frenzy was fighting its way back through
the trees. There were open spaces in the garden now. Patches of open,
blood-red moonlight. But in all of these, motionless tiny figures were
lying where they had been trampled.

Contrition swept Drake. It seemed that everything he attempted was
doomed to disaster. Ahlma was gripping him.

"Drake, look--off there!"

They could see behind them over the palace roof; the shining lake; the
island at the horizon where the Togarites were hiding.

Alt cried out, stricken with horror. And then Drake saw it.

They stood, Drake, Ahlma and Alt, three giants, gazing out over the
lake. The dawn was nearer than Drake had realized. The sky above the
island was turning red. A bank of clouds off there was reddening.
The swift-coming dawn was at hand. The moon was fading. The scene
everywhere was brightening.

Upon the island, where a green hill showed dark against the lightening
sky, something abnormal showed. A dark shape, growing, expanding.
It spread, sidewise and upward; not a human shape, not a giant, but
something far more ominous. It was rounded and oblong; and to be
visible at this distance it must be already a hundred feet long.

Then in a moment it was twice that. It seemed shoving at the hill with
its growth--shoving itself toward the water.

The Togaro space-ship! It had come now suddenly from its hiding place.
Realization swept Drake with a surge of horror. Togaro's departure was
at hand!

The ship was expanding with tremendous rapidity. It soon had shoved
itself off the island with its growth. It lifted slightly and then
settled upon the water, floating on a raft-like hull of pontoons.

Another minute. It lay off there as though moored to the tiny island.
It was still growing, a monstrous thing now. Most of it was below the
curve of the horizon, but its stern loomed up beside the island. A ship
a mile long now. In another minute it might be twice that.

Drake's thoughts were whirling. This monstrous thing--why didn't it
rise and be gone?

As though to answer his thoughts he became aware that Ahlma and Alt had
turned and were gazing again over the city. Then Drake knew why the
Togaro vehicle was lingering.

From everywhere about the distant landscape, from a hundred points in
the spread of the city, giants were rising! The dawn--this dawn now
beginning--was the signal. Giants, widely scattered at various points,
appearing now out of smallness!

There was a giant whose head and shoulders rose from one of the city
streets quite near at hand. The sight of him caught Drake's fascinated
attention. He grew with amazing swiftness to a height of perhaps two
hundred feet. Then his growth suddenly stopped. He stood gazing about
him. In the faint light of the dawn Drake could see him plainly--a
Togarite, stocky, wide-shouldered, bullet-headed. He wore, upon his
chest and waist a series of belts. And about his throat a leather
necklace, with pads out over his shoulders.

His torso, shoulders and neck were black with clinging tiny human
figures! They hung upon his straps like clustering insects. They were
in their normal size, Drake judged. They had climbed upon him when
he was small. He seemed to be carrying a hundred or more. He stood a
moment, then stepped cautiously up to the flat roof of a near-by house.
It cracked with his weight. He leaped over it, into another street. He
may have crushed scores of people who were gathered there. Drake could
hear faint screams. The giant leaped again, found a broader street, ran
down it toward the lake, and waded into the water.

A hundred such incidents. A hundred such giants simultaneously
appearing at the signal of the dawn. They were carrying ten thousand
people at the least. They appeared from everywhere, laden with the tiny
clinging figures.

From the distant hills of the open country still more of them came
running, dashing through the city, wrecking its houses, trampling the
crowds in the streets; heading for the lake.

The water was soon lashed into a turmoil. The giants were all a
prearranged height. The water rose only to their hips. It beat white
against them as they forced their way through it toward the island
where the monstrous vehicle was waiting to receive them.

Drake understood it now. In smallness the Togarites had been secretly
working; gathering their followers from among the people. It was an
exodus now to the island where the expedition to conquer the earth was
ready to depart.

There were giants rising from the island now. More of Togaro's
followers, gathered there in smallness, growing now to join this
arriving throng of their fellows. One giant, taller than all the
others, loomed into the sky, black against the blood-red dawn. He was
standing in the lake, far away, so that only his head and shoulders
were above the horizon. It may have been Togaro, directing the
embarkation. He was monstrous; and the vehicle on the water, lying
quiescent now with its stern looming on the curve of the little globe,
was monstrous.

The giants were clustered out there, climbing with their human freight
into the doorway of the ship. And they were still arriving. The city
was wrecked with their passage. The broken streets were littered with
mangled forms of the trampled crowds.

The sunrise came. The blurred little sun was red. It bathed the
shattered, screaming city with crimson; it painted the running giants;
it turned the foaming waters of the lake to blood.

When the turmoil was over and the littered giants had all embarked,
off there against the red morning sky the monstrous vehicle was again
expanding.




                              CHAPTER XXI

                          _Riding the Giant_


I must revert now to that moment when I clung to the huge strap which
was the back of Togaro's belt and was lifted through the wrecked cabin
of our ship. I could see very little: the bulge of Togaro's shirt above
me; the strap of his belt, wide as the length of my arm, to which I
clung.

There was a rending crash. A dizzying, monstrous sweep of movement; a
thump as we struck the ground; then the rhythmic swoops upward and down
which marked Togaro's giant leaps as he ran.

The wind tore past me. I could see the blur of the swaying ground; I
seemed at least fifty feet above it. Soon I was higher than that, for
Togaro's body was constantly growing.

Then we were in the lake, Togaro wading. The water rose to his hips. It
surged in white-lashed waves close under me; the spray from it drenched
me. Overhead, fifty feet up or more, I could see one of Dianne's white
arms clinging to Togaro's neck. He had evidently given her some of the
expanding drug, so that she grew proportionately to him.

I remained tiny. His growth and hers were ended by the time we reached
the island. I tried to keep my wits. I was to Togaro the size of an
insect now. But if he got smaller he would very soon become aware of
me. He stood in the water by the island, looking back at the city.
Presently I felt his belt dwindling. I quickly took some of the
diminishing drug myself.

We all three dwindled, about maintaining our relative size. The island
came up and spread around us. Down into smallness we shrank. I need not
detail it. I found that presently we were in a forest of immense green
stalks, which might have been grass. They grew gigantic up into the
sky. Soon I could only see beside us one monstrous green stalk.

There seemed a sort of ravine in the tumbled, uneven ground. Togaro
walked into it. There was a valley. An encampment here!

The encampment of the Togarites on the island! Microscopically small,
but Togaro dwindled into it now; and upon his belt I still was clinging.

I saw about me a group of huge dwellings. A crowd of giants. A bustle
of activity, making ready for departure. And then I saw the space-ship.
It was lying hidden here.

I saw that now Dianne was about the same size as Togaro. He placed her
upon the ground; her head towered above my lofty perch. I heard the
rumble of Togaro's voice over all the clatter of the camp.

"I will take you aboard, Dianne. We start in two hours."

We went through the ship's doorway. Down a passage, gigantic. Into a
cabin, gigantic.

"Dianne, you sit here, quietly, and wait for me. Will you do that? Or
are you going to cause me trouble?"

She said, "I am not foolish enough to disobey you, Togaro."

"That is right. I will not hurt you."

There was a cushion on the floor. She sat down. I peered around the
bulge of Togaro's waist and saw her. She was looking up at him.
Smiling, but it was a pale, harassed smile.

"You speak in English, Togaro? Why is that?"

He faced her; the movement of his turning was a wild swoop through the
air for me.

He said, "When I am Master of the Earth it will be our language. We
will forget Mita, you and I. This is the end of Mita." His chuckle had
an ominous implication. "I will be back presently, Dianne."

I saw that there was a man stationed here at the door of the room
on guard. My heart was pounding wildly. Togaro was going out. Above
everything I must make my presence known to her. But how could I get
down from Togaro's belt? I was fifty feet above the ground.

He walked toward the door. I stood recklessly upon the narrow ledge
which was the top thickness of his belt. At the door he stopped to
speak to the guard--telling him no doubt to watch Dianne carefully.
Togaro's back was toward the cabin wall. A window was here, with a
portière and a rope thick as my body. I was swung within a few feet of
it. I leaped, caught the rope, wound my legs around it.

I slid cautiously down the fifty-foot length of rope to the ground. I
found the floor in shadow. The figure of Dianne was a hundred yards
away.

I ran over toward the wall and circled toward her.




                             CHAPTER XXII

                       "_Vengeance of Togaro!_"


To Dianne, and to the guard in the doorway, I was a figure an inch
or so in height, plainly to be seen if I moved too fast, or left the
shadows of the floor. But I did neither. I reached Dianne safely,
though it took me a long time.

I circled behind her. I climbed upon the heights of the cushion, I
touched her robe. Did I dare pluck at it? I thought I might perhaps
attract her attention.

I took another ten minutes, or it may have been half an hour, climbing
along the cushion to its other side. And presently her hand, as she
idly moved it, came to rest quite near me. I looked up and saw that her
face was turned my way.

I decided to chance it. I darted forward and stood against the curve of
her wrist. She felt me. Her instinctive movement of the hand knocked
me over, but I fell into the soft billows of the cushion. I lay quiet,
praying that she might not cry out.

She recognized me! She made no sound, did not even move. But near me
one of her fingers was gently swaying.

I held myself motionless, waiting. In a moment I could feel her turning
cautiously, so that her robe might hide me from the guard's view.

A fold of the robe presently came over me like a great golden curtain.
Her finger, larger than my body, came carefully feeling for me. I
reached for it. Clung to it. It pulled me as it slowly shifted away.
And then her thumb came near. I was carefully lifted, carried with a
gentle swoop through the air and set down twenty feet away.

A deep shadow was here; I was near the back wall of the cabin. I knew
Dianne wanted me to stand quiet; knew that she was planning how we
might communicate. Her voice sounded as she spoke to the guard. Their
native language--I could not understand it, but quite evidently she was
telling him that she was tired, for presently she lay prone, with her
head on the cushion.

Her face was turned toward me, and away from the guard. She had made
our opportunity. I ran forward. The guard could have seen me then, but
he did not, and in a moment Dianne's head was between me and him. I
climbed again upon the cushion. I stood beside Dianne's face. Her ear
was near me.

"Dianne!"

Her lips moved, whispering, "Yes, Frank!"

"Dianne--I came, riding Togaro. I have the drugs."

"Be very careful, Frank."

I had no conscious plan. I was unarmed now--I had dropped my weapon in
the cabin of the other ship when I leaped for Togaro's waist. But there
must be some way of getting Dianne out of this room, out of the ship,
back to Drake.

"Dianne, do you think if I could get larger and surprise this guard
that we could get out?" She had seen more of our surroundings than I.

"No!" She was plainly agitated, but she held herself quiet, just her
lips moving in the faintest of whispers. "No! Don't get larger--not
now! The passage is full of men--they're loading the ship. We'll be
starting soon, Frank, you can escape! Go! Go now--get back to Drake."

"No," I murmured. "Dianne, then you must get small."

"Frank! Run!"

Togaro had returned! I leaped from the cushion and hid near by.

An hour passed. I think it must have been that long. Togaro was talking
with Dianne. They spoke in English. He was very gentle with her. He
told her they were almost ready to start; told her with triumph that
his expedition was larger and in better shape than he had expected.

Dianne knew that father was guarding the rock fragment, and that all
these thousands of Togarites could never escape into our earth-world.
Togaro knew that also. But he ignored it. Had he a plan perhaps to get
his hordes out of the rock?

Dianne was apparently very docile; but I could hear how cautious she
was in all she said.

The sounds of the embarkation were constantly audible. Togaro said at
last, "I think we are ready."

He went to the door and spoke to the guard. Dianne seized the
opportunity to flash me a warning glance.

Togaro came back. "I've ordered the start."

The familiar shock came as the size-changing current suffused the ship.
It began enlarging. Togaro took Dianne to the window.

"Stand here, little sweet one."

His tone made me shudder. His arm went around her shoulders. I could
see her shrink with repulsion and fear.

"Togaro--"

At once he withdrew his arm. Strange scoundrel! He knew how to handle
this girl--or thought he did. He said,

"My silly little Dianne--you almost love me!" He was quizzically
ironical. "Almost, but not quite! But that--all in good time I will
correct it. Just now we have more important things to worry us."

"Yes," she murmured. "Togaro, you are hurting me."

"Hurting you? I am not touching you!"

"Hurting me--with your threat against my world."

"How strange a way to say it! Hurting you! Which world do you mean I
threaten? Why, Dianne, I threaten all worlds!"

He said it boastfully, but with complete irony. "You know that, Dianne.
I am as you once told me, the great heartless fiend. The incarnate
devil--is that the way you say it in English? The heartless, murderous
Togaro. Ah, but not concerning you, little Dianne. My heart is very
full of love for you."

She surprised me, and him equally, by retorting vehemently,

"That is a lie! You love yourself--you are in love with your own dream
of conquest. Not in love with me! Filled with desire for me? Not very
much, Togaro! Enough to make you want to hold me here, amuse yourself
with dallying--because you think you are a very great lover. But
your greatest desire is to murder! To kill! To destroy your fellow
creatures--and you ask me to try to love you."

He put his arm around her again, but she flung him away. He laughed.

"Masterful little woman--a fit mate for Togaro, master of the earth.
Would you not say it so, Dianne? You have used all your words and have
none left? But if you will not talk, at least you will stand here with
me and look out of the window. See, we have come above the island trees
now."

They stood silent, gazing. From down by the floor I could see nothing.
Then along the wall I noticed where a translucent pane came to the
floor to join a floor window. It was dark over there. I ran; and found
a jutting edge of casement around which I could peer and see out. It
occurred to me that with Togaro and Dianne absorbed, with their backs
to the cabin, I might now get large. But the guard had not relaxed.

I stared through the window. We were a gigantic ship now. Our growth
was spreading us over the island. I gazed down from a height at the
small island trees; they were being mashed beneath us as we grew. The
island's hill was near by; we shoved our way at it.

The island was dwindling beneath us. Then Togaro called an order. I
could hear the echoes of it being relayed to the control room. The ship
lifted; moved away from the tiny island, and settled on the water. I
saw on the island some of Togaro's men growing to giants.

The red light of dawn was in the sky. It was the scene Drake, Ahlma
and Alt were witnessing as they stood by the palace. Our size-changing
current went off. We lay, a monstrous vehicle, with shallow water all
around us, and a tiny green island near by.

I heard Togaro say:

"We are not floating, Dianne. See, the water is so shallow, we are
grounded upon the bottom. The curve of this little earth is already
apparent beneath us--the ends of our ship are in the air."

"Togaro!" His words, the implication of which escaped me then, brought
a horror to her. "Togaro, we will depart without getting larger?"

He did not answer, he merely laughed and said, "Wait and see, Dianne.
Look now; my loyal followers are arriving."

The giants, clustered with their tiny human freight, came wading. They
stood in the lashed blood-red waters; then came aboard.

The ship resounded with the turmoil of their arrival. They thronged the
corridors; their tiny human burdens were taken from them and herded
like ants into the various cabins. One of the giants, still littered,
came to our door and spoke to Togaro. I saw him as a fellow about
Togaro's own height. The people he was carrying were as small as I now
was myself. He presently turned and went away.

The embarkation proceeded. For ten minutes or so, Togaro left Dianne
and went outside. He commanded her to stay by the window; and with the
guard doubly watchful, she obeyed.

Nor did I move. I saw Togaro outside, standing in the water. His figure
grew so monstrous beside the ship that only the lower part of his legs
was visible. He was searching the horizon, no doubt, to make sure that
no more of his men were coming. Then, after a moment, he was dwindling.
He came aboard in his former size.

"All are aboard, little Dianne. We are ready to make the final start."

She said, with a frightened hush to her voice: "Start away in space,
Togaro?"

"No!" he said grimly. "We shall stay here, Dianne, resting upon the
curve of your little world--and grow a little larger. Why not?"

She could find no words. He added, "We're leaving this world Mita
forever, Dianne."

She burst out, with more anger than horror this time--but I knew it was
a pretended anger, and that horror was sweeping her. "Why not, indeed!
Bring death here to no purpose--why not?"

"I'll tell you," he said: "I would have ruled your world, with you
as my queen. Your people would not have me. Rejected me--made me an
outcast. Now they shall pay for it!"

He said it with a horrible, calm grimness. "Pay for it, Dianne, by
dying! Death at the hand of Togaro. Vengeance of Togaro. Ten million
people die, because Togaro is angry!"

It struck her silent; she stood white and silent and helpless beside
him. And as though Fate were determined to keep me helpless also, the
guard at the door stood with renewed alertness, his gaze searching the
room.




                             CHAPTER XXIII

                        _Doomed Little Planet!_


The last scenes upon the planet Mita, as it was given to me to witness
them, were unfolded now beyond this window through which I was gazing.
I suppose it took another hour. It might have been far longer.

Tremendous fearsome drama! I saw, far below this window, a toy lake--a
scene in miniature of a lake with little green islands. I must have
been near the stern of the ship. Looking down, I could see that our
tremendous hull was jutting into the air, high above the water. Our
growth had pushed us back toward the city at the lakeshore. I saw the
city now come into view beneath me.

A brief glimpse. It was full daylight. Our hull was jutting a thousand
feet perhaps above the tiny houses. I saw the wrecked and littered
streets where the giants had passed.

The glimpse of a minute or two, no more. But what I saw down there is
stamped with indelible horror upon my memory. It was a city of wild
confusion, black with surging, tiny people, trampling over the dead
and dying unheeded. Fires broke out in the shattered buildings. The
great black shadow of our looming hull overhead lay for a moment like
a finger of death upon the scene. In the gloom down there, the fires
showed lurid yellow and red, with black smoke rising in tiny wisps.

A minute, then the scene had dwindled and passed beneath us beyond my
sight. Our hull did not touch the city; upon this shrinking little
globe--this surface becoming every moment more visibly convex--we were
balanced amidships somewhere off in the lake, with the curving world
falling away from under our bow and stern.

My window soon was high above a toy landscape of miniature forests and
scattered dwellings; and ribbons of roads. There seemed people running
along the roads.

A line of mountains showed; the sunset was on them; and to one side I
could see a curving ocean. All shrinking--small, but sharp and clear in
every detail as though I were gazing through a diminishing glass.

The mountains came down under me. The sunlight faded from them; beyond
them I saw the stars.

I heard Togaro give an order. Our ship lifted a trifle and hung poised.
The sharply curving landscape lowered. Then, with a gasp I realized how
monstrously large we had become. Why this was the top of a little globe
beneath me! It was not far away--only a few miles down; but it was so
small that I could see all the curve of its upper surface--all the
configurations of land and water; and the stars gleaming beyond it. A
little ball, hanging here in space close under me. Its entire diameter
was not much longer now than the hull-length of our ship.

Another few minutes. The scene from an earthly landscape, was turning
celestial. We were in space. Black space, with blazing, glittering
stars. Mita's sun was visible--a fiery globe with a vivid corona of
mounting flames. Still, close under us, the planet Mita, like a child's
ball, hung attached to us by gravitation.

The heavens were visibly rotating. We clung to Mita, so that the
rotating planet carried us around. We were a monstrous weight, larger
than the planet now, but still gravitationally attached to it. I could
fancy the planet lurching. Its axial rotation lurching wildly. Its
orbital swing about its little sun suddenly altered.

We rose presently and swung away from Mita. The sun was over my head--I
could not see it. But beneath me I saw the planet. A ball--like a ball
of steel magnetized, following a monstrous magnet. It followed us. It
clung to our giant bulk, with the force of gravity irresistibly drawing
it after us.

Now all my vague understanding of Togaro's purpose burst upon me with
full realization. We were swooping toward Mita's little sun! A moment,
and then the ship echoed with Togaro's vehement commands. We swung away
from the sun. With speed and size gigantic, we swooped sidewise and
darted away.

My window showed celestial space. But I saw how small it was! Distant
tiny stars, all disturbed, chaotic with this giant bulk of our ship
come among them! The sun and Mita were close to us, directly before
my window. A ball of yellow-red blazing gases, and a little lurching
planet!

We had shaken Mita off, flung it like a pitched ball. Upon that side of
our hull we were repulsive now to gravity. Mita's orbital revolution
about its sun was checked. It staggered--and then began falling.

A slow movement at first. I stared. Then I could see the movement: a
crazily spinning little ball, lurching, falling--

Doomed little planet, falling toward its flaming sun!




                             CHAPTER XXIV

                         _The End of a World_


I have from Drake his impressions of those last hours on Mita. A wild,
chaotic picture his memory holds. Jumbled impressions--yet as I record
them in that fashion, doubtless I will approximate the truth, for they
were jumbled, frantic scenes of panic--millions of people struggling
upon a doomed world!

Upon Drake there was a sense of despair; his own futility was so
clearly shown, and the futility of his plans! He had sent Alt to have
me come into the atom with automatics. He stood before Dianne's palace,
gazing at a world gone mad. An automatic was in his hand, as futile as
a cap pistol in the hands of a child.

By nature Drake was resourceful; cautious, but reckless too, when he
thought reckless daring was necessary. He stood, there as a giant
with Ahlma and Alt, and saw in the blood-red dawn Togaro's monstrous
vehicle expanding into the sky. It did not need Alt's horrified words
to bring realization to Drake; nor the wrecked city--the turmoil of the
panic-stricken throngs--to make Drake realize that this was the end. He
knew it.

A very human sense of utter failure made Drake stand and tell
himself bitterly that there was no use trying to do anything. But the
feeling passed. It is instinctive to struggle for life against every
most desperate circumstance. Drake became aware that in the wrecked
city spread there in the dawn before him, thousands of people were
struggling for life. Doing nothing with any rational thought--and yet
struggling.

Behind him, in the palace, he heard the shouts of the councilmen; the
clatter of footsteps. The government, against all these odds, was
striving to do something. Nobody was quitting.

It stung him into action.

"Alt, we must get back to normal size! Help them, Alt. This is death if
we stand here."

They took the drug. The scene dwindled. The Togaro ship off there on
the water seemed rising to new gigantic proportions. Its huge stern was
coming toward the city. Projecting above the water now; Drake could
see the space between the bottom of its hull and the lake surface. It
came, that giant stern, shoving its way forward. The length of its
hull extended like a gray wall off for miles to the horizon where it
lay balanced, with other miles on beyond, the shape of it blurred by
distance against the red sky of dawn.

Drake attained normal size. Ahlma clung to him.

Alt, too, was struggling to cope with a terror almost overpowering.
"Drake--what--what can we do?"

They were down in the garden now, at the doorway of the palace.
Officials were running in and out. Calling orders, with no one to hear
them. Some of the police stood here, inactive, stupefied with terror.

"Come inside," said Drake. He pulled at the confused Alt. "Don't you
understand? Our ship may be repaired by now. We've got to get it
repaired! Herd the people into it! Make it large enough to take us
all--all these people. Alt, we've got to send messengers--send them in
giant size--to the other cities! The local airships--dispatch them to
bring the people here--get them all into our vehicle and get away! You
understand? This is the end of the world here! Abandon it! This is--the
end!"

They ran into the turmoil of the palace.

In the chaos of those final hours Drake must have played a leading
and a masterful part. He does not tell it so, but I think it is true.
Authority--the routine of any official activity--was wholly gone. Of
them all, it was Drake who held most of his wits, who gave orders and
enforced obedience.

The time was very short. There was an hour--or even less--while the red
dawn faded into full light of day. The monstrous hull of the Togaro
ship projected like a black roof over all the scene. The shadow of it
lay black upon the city, the palace and lake. It grew until up there in
the sky nothing else could be seen.

Then it lifted. It moved up a few miles. It hovered up there. From
one horizon to the other it loomed, a solid dark shape like a leaden
cloud-bank. Its great pontoons were visible. The rectangles of floor
windows showed in its bulging hull.

An expanding dark cloud. It soon was spread so wide that all across the
sky was only one small section of its length--one pontoon, one window.

But during that hour Drake was accomplishing things in all the turmoil
of people almost stricken of reason by terror. The space-ship was ready
at last. The repairs fortunately had been almost finished before the
panic began.

Messengers were sent into the burning city with orders to herd the
crowd to the landing field. Local ships were sent to other cities.
Some got started, some did not. But a few, at the very last, came
back loaded with refugees. The young men of that army which Drake had
expected to lead into smallness against Togaro, were now most useful
of all. They understood the drugs and could be trusted with them. In
the lower room of the palace Drake stood with the main supply of drugs.
He dealt them out to this little army. A hundred or more. They stood,
white-faced and silent; but alert, eager to obey.

"Alt, tell them--" Drake cursed his inability to speak with any fluency
this native language. But Alt, always at his elbow, was swift to
interpret. "Alt, tell these ten to get large, very large, and run to
the water city."

Another ten, somewhere else; and others. In a size gigantic, they could
circle this little globe on foot in an hour or so. They were to pick up
as many of the people as possible and bring them back.

The lower room of the palace was dark now. The brief day was past.
Night had come. Stars, and the moon. But the moon had only shown for a
moment. The black cloud, the shape of the Togaro vehicle, was up there
among the stars. The moon had swung crazily and was gone.

Into the palace windows came the mingled sounds of the night of chaos:
screams, the roaring of futile orders in the garden, where a crowd was
surging over the trampled neglected bodies. Darkness out there, painted
by the lurid glare from the burning city.

Drake dispatched his men. They turned out into the frantic night,
fought their way for space in the milling throngs, and took their drug.
Soon they were rising as giants, moving cautiously to the open country,
then running.

Drake had been to the landing field several times. The vehicle was
ready. It lay gigantic, spreading all across the field. Thousands of
refugees were in it. Others were momentarily arriving. Ten thousand
now, the officials there told Drake. A thousand, hurt in the throngs or
crushed by the passing of Togaro's giants, had also been carried here.

Drake sent the other men to search the city--to bring back from the
littered streets any who seemed still alive. From the palace gardens
and the nearest streets, the police were spurred to carry in the maimed.

A thousand people arrived while Drake stood there on the field. A
local ship came down and landed with another thousand. Two of his men,
gigantic, came dashing up with another thousand clinging to them whom
they had collected in the near-by rural sections. Men and women, and
children huddled in their parents' arms. Some had bundles of clothes,
which for all this clinging to the back of a giant in the last hours
of the end of a world they still were reluctant to abandon. Families,
trudging aimlessly along country roads in the night or driving carts
piled with household treasures, had been seized by these friendly
giants and brought to the vehicle.

A lump was in Drake's throat. These few thousands of people, arriving
here to what might or might not be ultimate safety--but there were ten
million people here on this doomed little world!

Drake wondered how long he dared hold the vehicle here. The night
itself was wildly crazy. He saw the moon vanish with a lunge. The stars
were abnormally swaying. A wind was springing up from the lake, a
violent, aimless wind. The water lashed against the shore.

The arriving giants reported storms in the other hemisphere. The sea
had mounted and submerged many of the islands.

Then the next dawn came. The sun swung crazily up. Swiftly, abnormally
mounting to the zenith. And there, against all reason of nature,
it seemed to hang motionless; for an hour perhaps. Then it dropped
visually sidewise, and came again, swaying like a pendulum.

The Togaro vehicle showed only occasionally now as a distant blur among
the stars. Mita was wildly lurching. This was not day and night. A
chaos!

Drake knew it was near the end. The sun presently hung motionless. It
was growing hotter. Its heat and fiercely intensified light beat down.
Soon they would be intolerable.

"A few hours more, Alt. That's all we can stay here."

Drake was horribly worried over Ahlma. She had pleaded:

"I am experienced with the drug. You must let me go, Drake. Let me get
large--I will bring some of them back to safety--"

In his harassed activity he had yielded, had stood watching her huge
robed figure running off into the night. She had not yet returned. A
hundred times he had felt that he must drop everything and go after
her. But he could not be spared; nor could he spare Alt.

Twice Drake had checked the embarking multitude and had ordered the
vehicle to grow larger. It lay now across the field and over half a
dozen near-by city streets. They had been cleared of people, and the
growing vehicle had crushed the houses there into a wreckage of masonry.

The end was near. The sun was twice its normal size. The glaring heat
was horrible. Jain, with other officials, were demanding the start.

"No! Not yet!" But Drake knew that not for very long could he force his
way.

A few giants were still straggling in; Drake and Alt and a hundred
other leaders were standing in a giant size at the vehicle doorway.
The glare of sunlight was blinding. The lake was roaring with a hot,
sulphurous wind plucking at it, lashing it.

But Ahlma had not come. Then off over the toy landscape, Drake saw the
blur of her robe. Her head and shoulders mounted above the horizon.
She came running with great leaps. As she arrived Drake saw the small
figures upon her. Women and children, almost all of them.

"Ahlma!" He was her own size. He touched her; words would not come. But
he knew that the safety of all these multitudes had meant less to him
than the life of this one girl.

"Ahlma, go in. They'll unload them inside--There--the doorway--"

"Yes, Drake. How many are here?"

"We think about a hundred and ten thousand."

"Oh!"

It was so few, out of ten million!

Ahlma went into the ship. Drake turned to Jain. "Shall we start?"

"We must!"

A toy world lay wrecked at their feet. Clouds had come suddenly down.
They swirled over the land--tumbling black mist, shot with lurid green
and turgid yellow. But the sun beat through them. Rain had came in a
downpour; but the sun beat it away and dried it up.

"Come in then, Jain."

No, there was another giant coming. He panted up with his cluster of
refugees. And then another came.

They could wait no longer. There was a moment when no arriving giants
were in sight. Ten million people on this doomed planet--only a few
over a hundred thousand were here to depart. But the sun was too hot.
The scene was strewn with people who had fallen in the heat. Drake was
suddenly staggering. Jain pulled at him, and the door closed after
them. From a stricken toy world, the vehicle struggled away.

The interior of the ship was a blur of murmuring sounds. A hundred or
so giants, like Drake, to whom the ship was a thing a few hundred feet
long; and a hundred and ten thousand people, small as ants, swarming it
everywhere.

Drake stood at a window. He thinks he must have stood there for hours.
The surface of Mita dropped away as the ship sped off into space. The
stars showed, celestial space.

The Togaro vehicle was gone. Drake saw Mita through his window. A
little ball. The sun lighted it upon one side, so that it showed as a
reddish half moon, with the dark portion dimly visible.

Drake's ship was expanding. But after an hour or so its size-changing
mechanism was shut off. It hovered--the Mitans in control of it
lingering with fascinated gaze to witness the destruction of their
world.

It took perhaps a few hours more. Mita was falling. The yellow-red
ball of sun hung off there in the black field of space beneath Drake's
window. Mita seemed above, falling slowly. The movement was hardly
visible at first. But it accelerated. The two bodies visibly drawing
together.

Then Mita was rushing. Drake thinks he remembers seeing a tail
streaming out behind it. A tail, like a comet, as though by its fall it
were turning incandescent and leaving a stream of glowing star-dust. Or
perhaps with its rapid fall, its atmosphere was leaving it--dust-laden
air streaming off into space where the dust caught the sunlight and
glowed. There is no one to say.

A fall of millions of miles. It was that far, to Mita. I can fancy,
in those last hours, the blazing heat withering everything upon the
planet's surface. Its ten million inhabitants--save those few Drake had
helped to rescue--I can think that long before the end, they were dead;
shriveled, fallen in the heat. Smothered, choked by the gasses which
must have polluted what little atmosphere was left.

Drake saw the end. The planet plunged. Fell like a plummet at the
last and struck the blazing surface of its sun. There was a flash; a
leaping, extra spurt of flame for just a moment in the sun's corona.

Then the sun blazed alone. What had been Mita was fused and gone.
Non-existent!

From the window Drake turned shudderingly away. He had seen the end of
a world.




                              CHAPTER XXV

                        _In the Campfire Light_


There were some forty thousand people on the Togarite ship, adventuring
out upon the conquest of the earth. A few hundred men, who were the
Togarite leaders. I think there were perhaps six or eight hundred of
these in all. They were experienced with the drugs, and constituted
Togaro's active army.

Not very many for the conquest of all the nations of our earth. Yet
enough! I realized it as I contemplated what they could do. Togaro
was planning carefully. There were thousands of other men on this
ship--Mitans who had joined his cause. He could easily have trained
them. But he was wise enough to realize that the diabolical power of
the drugs needed always to be kept under his close control. He could
handle his six or eight hundred trusted men; a larger army might have
been awkward.

There were several hundred giants aboard the ship now. The rest of the
horde was in a tiny size. They had no drugs. They were men--but there
were women and children also. I could imagine that all the renegades of
Togaro's world were assembled here, eager with the lust of conquest of
an earth they had never seen.

They swarmed the vehicle now. They were as small as I. Fortunately none
came to this cabin where Dianne was closely watched, and where I was
lurking. If they had come, being so small, they would doubtless have
discovered me.

I did not dare leave the cabin; nor did I find, during all the voyage
which lasted what seemed twenty-four hours perhaps, an opportunity of
again communicating with Dianne.

I need not detail this outward voyage. I saw many strange things
through that cabin window. The reverse of the inward trip. Diminishing,
shrinking space. The stars becoming so small that they flared about us
like a rain of sparks.

Great voids of distance, always shrinking. Then at last, the
gray glowing molecules. Whirling and tumbling. A few at first,
very far away. Then many, very close. Then great clouds of them,
rolling and swirling. Dark. But sometimes shimmering. And always
shrinking--congealing into solidity.

The transitions from one condition to another--from celestial space
to solid, rocky abyss--were never apparent, and impossible of close
description. I was watching eagerly for solidity. I did not see it
come--I saw only that at last it was there--out there in the void.
A vague, distant rocky wall. It dropped downward, as though we were
mounting. Barren cliffs gigantic, but dwindling. Closing in upon us.

Activity became apparent throughout the ship as we neared the voyage
end. Dianne, after a few hours, had been given into the charge of
several giant women. She had been taken away to another cabin. A wild
thought came to me that I should cling to her robe. But the thing had
come suddenly, unexpectedly. I was across the cabin. I could not reach
her; the chances of discovery would have been too great. I lay in a
recess niche of the bottom of the wall, and watched her go.

Later I found upon the floor some crumbs of food which she had dropped
for me. They were, to my size, great chunks of a baked dough, like
bread. I ate part of them. My hunger was appeased, but I suffered from
thirst.

Togaro used this cabin now for consultation with some of his men. I
lay, carefully hidden. The room was brighter than before, and the guard
was constantly alert. Togaro sat at a table with a few of his men
around him.

They talked in their native language; I could not understand a word of
it. He seemed to be planning his campaign. He had lived in our world
for a year. He doubtless knew a good deal about it. He spread upon the
table now what seemed to be maps.

The ship landed in the depths of a stunted forest. Dark, shadowed
verdure, with a dim effulgence of light upon far distant mountain
ranges. The disembarkation took an hour or more. I could hear the
people marching out of the ship, clustering in the forest, setting up
their first encampment with the giants helping them. There seemed no
need for secrecy. Fires began springing up. Portable houses of animal
skins, like tents, were erected. Meals were prepared. A myriad duties
necessary to the welfare of forty thousand people were under way.

I climbed through the wire-woven side hull of the ship, and reached
the ground safely. I stood beside a tree. The giant ship had mangled a
great spread of the forest. I found that I had got out none too soon.
The ship began shrinking. Its crew was taking it into a smaller size,
to hide it--or abandon it somewhere--and then themselves return to
rejoin the encampment. It dwindled, and presently was gone. The mashed
forest trees lay like broken jackstraws where it had been.

I stood for perhaps an hour there in the darkness, getting my bearings
upon these new conditions. I was about normal in size to this forest;
this tree was stunted, but its limbs arched out over me for what seemed
twenty or thirty feet.

I found, too, that these thousands of people encamped here over
several miles of forest territory, were all about my size. And the
giants now began dwindling. Evidently they found it dangerous to move
about--difficult to avoid trampling the tiny multitude. They dwindled
to the smaller stature.

It was presently almost a normal earthly scene. A forest encampment by
night. Camp fires of burning brush; cone-shaped tents; like wigwams;
families clustered over their outdoor meal; the Togarite leaders
giving orders, directing the activity.

I did not see Togaro himself. Nor Dianne. I would have to move about
and locate her. I pondered changing size. It did not seem advisable.
With a smaller stature I could not, in days, tramp about this camp and
find Dianne. Or if now I got larger, I would be instantly conspicuous.
I was conspicuous enough already. My garments were different from all
these Mitans--my knitted bathing suit marked me for a stranger. My
whole aspect--my language--differed.

I made a start. I moved cautiously off through the trees. The lights
from the fires were circles of red and yellow. I kept out of them, in
the recessed shadows. Somewhere, at one of these fires, Dianne must be
sitting. I wondered if I could locate Togaro; he might have Dianne with
him.

Occasionally figures passed near me. I was seen no doubt, but only
dimly. Once I almost bumped into a man who was gathering brushwood. A
woman and a child came up and took it from him. I mumbled something and
ducked away.

The incident gave me an idea. The man was garbed in a jacket with
puffed, flaring sleeves and a circular bottom that flared like a skirt
at his knees. And he wore a cone-shaped hat, broad-brimmed. It was a
costume distinctive, and characteristic of most of these men. If I
could get possession of such a jacket and hat, they would disguise me.

I wandered on, skulking the fringes of the camp like a lurking Indian
in a primitive American forest.

The camp finally settled to sleep. The fires died. The Togarite men
patrolled back and forth, silent shadows in the gloom.

I found my opportunity at last. A tent, where by the embers of a fire
outside a man's jacket and hat were lying. I watched my chance when no
guard was near. I darted forward, seized the garments and made away.

Shrouded by the jacket, hiding my belt of drugs, with the hat brim
pulled low over my eyes, I felt a measure of security. I realized that
I was exhausted--that all during the outward voyage I had hardly dared
relax to sleep. I found now a wooded glen of ferns, dark and secluded,
with a blessed little rill of water at which I slaked my burning thirst.

Then I lay down, and in a moment was sleeping heavily.

The sound of voices wakened me. People were passing near me, but they
did not see me. Or if they did, my sleeping form caused no comment. How
long I had slept I did not know. But I was again hungry. And I found
that the camp was fully awake, bustling with its morning duties.

Morning? The darkness was no different from before. The camp fires were
lighted again. All that day--if day it could be called--I skulked, an
outcast in the encampment, stealing what food I needed. I found that my
aspect, unless under too close a scrutiny, was passing unnoticed.

But I could not locate Dianne or Togaro. There were forty thousand
people here in the forest. I skulked from one fire to another, but
without success.

Had Dianne been taken away? Again I cursed myself for an inept fool.
I wondered how long Togaro intended to keep this encampment? Then
presently I realized what was being done. I saw near by, in a clearing,
a giant rising. He grew to what looked like several hundred feet, and
then stopped. A gathered throng was off there, and I made my way in
that direction.

The tents were struck here. A thousand people were ready to start away.
The giant was giving them the drug. They marched off as they started
growing, with the giant leading them--dim figures towering into the
immensity of distance until presently they had vanished.

I realized now how this multitude would be taken upward into largeness.
There was not a sufficient supply of the drug for them all to have it
at a small size. The single Togarite captain, getting large, expanded
his drugs and then fed the thousand people in his charge; at every
stage of the journey he would do the same.

There were parties such as this starting now at regular intervals. I
wandered on; and I found Dianne at last. It was again near the time of
sleep. Ten thousand of the people had departed--but thirty thousand
were still here awaiting their turn.

Dianne was seated at a camp fire, around which several women were
cooking a meal. A tent stood near by--a peaked canopy of skins. It was
larger than most of the others, with tasseled drapings at its doorway.
Dianne's tent, where she was waited upon by these women, I did not
doubt.

I stood in the shadows of a tree, just outside the circle of fire
light. The light of the playing logs made Dianne's golden robe glisten;
etched her sharply against the darkness behind her. She sat composed
and quiet, with a regal dignity as the women prepared to serve her. I
thought, as I stood there in the darkness, that I had never seen her so
beautiful.

Could I get to her? I saw that for all her composed casual manner, she
was very alert.

I stood planning. A smaller size for me alone was not practical--I
had tried that before. But now, concealed under my jacket was enough
of the diminishing drug for both her and me. If I could get to her
unchallenged, she and I could take the drug and escape into smallness.

Whatever chance I had was at once gone. Togaro appeared! In a size
normal to Dianne and me, he came sauntering up to her fire and greeted
her. He was broadly smiling, evidently in a high good humor. He wore a
vivid outer jacket; his whole aspect--the colored sash about his hips,
his tasseled leggings--was that of a cavalier in jaunty, debonair mood.

I saw that he had discarded his belt of drugs. He took off his circular
hat and cast it to the ground.

The meal was ready. Togaro evidently dismissed the women; they moved
back, out of my line of vision behind the tent. I heard his voice
saying in English:

"You will serve us, little Dianne. Why not? A supper here together,
before we start the upward trip."

I could not hear what she said, but he answered:

"Yes, tonight. When we have eaten, Dianne. I have everything
organized--I am not needed here. You and I and your serving maids will
start. The next camp will be ready ahead of us--it will not be too long
a journey." He laughed. "I would not tire my little Dianne. I am good
to you; can you say it that I am not?"

I stood tense. To follow them upward would be difficult. It was now or
never.

Dianne moved about, serving the meal. They sat down facing each other
beside the fire and began to eat. Dianne was as yet wholly unaware of
my presence. I edged a little closer, slipped from one tree to another
until I was behind Togaro, with Dianne facing me.

I stood now in the darkness beside the bole of a tree, just beyond the
circle of fire light. I was hardly twenty feet from them. I could hear
their voices. My foot touched a loose rock. I stooped and picked it
up--a chunk larger than my fist. I thought that there might be no one
watching the scene. I wanted to creep forward, cross the lighted area,
and strike Togaro before he could make an outcry.

But Dianne must be made aware of me first, to be on her guard and ready
for my rush.

I took a step forward. She would see me now, I hoped--see me as a
vague, shadowy form in the gloom. I took off my hat, and got the
diminishing drug quickly available. I stood tense, gripping the chunk
of rock, a finger of my other hand to my lips warning her to silence.
If she would see me, she must have the presence of mind not to start,
or make any sign that would warn Togaro.

I thought I saw her stiffen. She stared my way.

"Togaro--"

It made my heart leap wildly. Was she about to call his attention to my
lurking figure? Did she see me, but not recognize me?

She stammered, "Togaro--you know I hate you. But hate and love are very
close. I--was wondering why you put on that sash. It's very becoming."

She had recognized me! I could not miss it--I even fancied she had sent
me a warning glance. But she looked instantly away, smiling now with a
mocking allure upon Togaro.

She leaned toward him. She repeated, "I hate you, Togaro," exactly as
before, yet with a great difference.

Though I knew it was deception, it shot a pang through me nevertheless;
and it must have struck at Togaro with a surge of emotion. Whatever
alertness to his surroundings he had had was gone. He put out a hand
and seized her by the shoulder. "Hate me? Why--"

She swayed toward him and was in his arms. But she struggled a little.

"Togaro, how dare you! Don't you dare--"

There is no man who can yield up a woman when she struggles like that.
I thought that over his shoulder she had shot me another glance.

I darted forward. Dianne was fighting with Togaro. Playfully--but she
saw me coming, and she changed. Gripped him by the face, with one of
her small hands over his mouth. Then she lunged, flung herself upon
him. The attack knocked him sidewise. He fell upon one arm.

For an instant she held her hand over his mouth against all his
surprised effort to tear it away. In that instant I was upon them. I
did not dare fling the rock.

Togaro saw me coming. With a lunge he cast off Dianne, and half rose to
meet me. We went down together. He was far stronger than I; and though
I landed on top of him, he rolled me over.

I was aware of Dianne plucking at us, striving to impede Togaro as we
fought.

The rock was still in my hand, but Togaro had my arm pinned. He fought
silently, then he let out a bellow. The camp took it up, and the uproar
surged toward us.

I was underneath him, and his hands went to my throat. But that
released my arm. I struck upward with the chunk of rock. It must have
hit him a glancing blow on the head. He relaxed; slumped, a dead weight
upon me.

I squirmed out from under him.

"Frank, this way!"

Dianne seized me. The alarm was spreading over all this section of the
camp. Men were running toward us. We dashed away into the trees.

"Wait--here, take this, Dianne."

We took the drug; ran on through the underbrush, dodging the firelight.
The scene expanded. The shouting in the camp faded into a dim muffled
roar overhead, and then was gone.




                             CHAPTER XXVI

                      _The Black and White Flags_


"It Seems so strange, Dianne, our being alone together."

"Strange, Frank?" Her laugh was like the pealing of little fairy bells.
"Strange? Why, when we were children we were together nearly all the
time."

Six years now since I had been alone with Dianne. She had been my
sister. We were alone now in the abyss--I was very conscious of how
alone we were. We sat by a rock, resting. We had found a pool of water.
This was our first stopping since we had escaped from Togaro.

We had no food, but we felt that we could get out of the rock fragment
to father before the need of it would be serious. We had encountered no
Togarites. This vast abyss--these endless mountains, cañons and caverns
of rock--seemed able to hold friends and enemies innumerable, and yet
never force them together.

We had at first got small enough to escape from the Togarite
encampment; had run, cautiously making our size larger so that the
running would take us an appreciable distance from the camp. Once away
from immediate pursuit, we started our upward journey in earnest.

We had soon found ourselves lost. It was all a strange, desolate,
unknown region to me. But Dianne had traveled it before; as we grew
larger, the main configurations of the dwindling region became familiar
to her. She found a route different from that which the Togarite
expedition had proposed using.

Discussing it with Dianne, I found myself puzzled at her confidence in
finding her way out and still avoiding the Togarite parties who were
ahead of us. Strange physical conditions, those of this size-change
traveling! Yet a moment's thought made the matter clear.

Traveling inward--becoming small--the slightest deviation from the
true direction would lead the traveler into vast new realms. Countless
universes spreading at his feet. There was space here, limitless. In
the size we were when upon Mita there was around us in just that single
atom countless light-years of astronomical distance. Coming back, we
left the atom. It shrank to a microscopical point. We grew larger than
the atoms; larger than the molecules.

Space within this fragment of rock which father was guarding was
constantly shrinking. Yet even in the abyss of the Togarite camp it was
a vast space. I cannot calculate it. But envisaging the distance from
one side of the rock fragment to the other, let us call it a thousand
miles.

We grew still larger. Soon, to us, there would be only five hundred
miles of distance in here. Then one hundred. Then one mile. Then only a
few feet, until at last we would emerge and see that all the space had
shrunk to the size of our hand.

Thus, coming out, all roads led in very nearly the same direction.
There was no solidity to the rock when viewed from the smaller
viewpoint; there is, indeed, no solidity to anything. A growing body,
avoiding being crushed, would at last emerge, no matter in what
direction it went.

Do I make it clear? I hope so.

At last we stopped, between the drug doses, to rest. We were at the
bottom of a vast circular caldron. Tumbled crags strewn in heaps. The
opposite rim, some ten miles away, was dimly visible in the gloom.
There were shadows in here now; it seemed that overhead a vague sheen
of light was apparent. We were near the top. Soon we would be out. I
touched Dianne's hand.

"You think we're larger--ahead of all the Togarites now?"

"Yes, I think so."

I did, also. It was imperative that we get out of the rock first, get
up there and warn father what was coming. If we did that, the expanding
Togaro hordes wouldn't have a chance.

"We'll have to rig up a black and white flag as a signal to father. You
remember, Dianne? I told you I'd arranged that with him. But how the
deuce can we?"

She surprised me by drawing from her robe a square of white fabric with
black stripes upon it.

"Dianne!"

"I found a chance to make it, Frank--on the ship when Togaro sent me to
another cabin."

She displayed it proudly. "Is it all right?"

It certainly was. A flag about two feet square. I stood up now and
spread it out.

"We'll wave it--like this, Dianne. Father will see it when we're still
very small."

I showed her how we'd wave it.

"Frank! Stop!"

Her gaze was off across the dim abyss of the caldron.

"Over there, Frank! Do you see something moving? I do!"

Miles away, partly up the opposite cliffside of the caldron, it seemed
that something was moving. The light was very dim, yet distant objects
were unnaturally sharp and clear. Something moving off there. We
stared. Then we thought we saw human figures standing on that far-off
cliff, and something waving.

"A flag, Frank!"

It seemed a flag. A black and white flag, something like our own,
waving at us!

The space-voyage which Drake, Ahlma, and Alt made from the doomed
planet, was very similar to this one I had just taken on the Togaro
ship. The Mitans landed in the abyss of rock. A hundred miles, or a
thousand, from the Togarite camp? There is no one to judge.

It was a full day, perhaps, after Togaro landed. A similar scene of
activity ensued, save that nearly three times as many people were here;
unorganized, badly equipped, refugees struggling upward, not bent upon
conquest, seeking only safety.

The voyage had been a busy one for Drake. He had tried to organize
things. There was not enough food or enough of the expanding drug for
this multitude. Drake organized it into smaller divisions, each in
charge of one of the Mitan officials.

When they landed, and the ship was hidden, the refugees began moving
upward in size, the leader of each party going ahead with food and
drugs, expanding them and dealing them out to his people.

It was the same system that Togaro was using. A slow journey upward,
stopping at each stage to erect a new encampment.

And immediately upon disembarking, Mitan leaders were sent out as
scouts--alert to locate the Togarites, and to avoid them.

In the first encampment Drake sat in consultation with Jain.

"I think, Jain, this is the best we can do. Get part way up--get all
the people up to that size--and then wait."

There was room down here to avoid the Togarites. But farther up in the
dwindling space a clash would be inevitable.

"You wish to go ahead of us?"

"Yes, with Alt and Ahlma. They know the way. We will take this black
and white flag." (Ahlma had made a flag.) "We can travel fast, Jain.
We'll go out and see my father. He controls everything up above. The
Togarites can't get out--and if we keep away from them, we're safe
enough. No use killing any of our Mitan people by fighting down in
here."

"But what about us?" Jain demanded with a touch of suspicion.

"I'll come back to you, Jain. Warn my father that this Togarite horde
may try to make a rush out, or get out by trickery. Warn him--and make
arrangements so that he can distinguish you Mitans from the Togarites.
Then, in small parties, we will go out."

Drake, Ahlma, and Alt started upon their journey. They went swiftly.
Thousands of miles, perhaps, from Dianne and me at the beginning. Like
us, they got safely ahead of the Togarites. At one stage they sighted a
Togaro party, but managed to avoid and pass it without being discovered.

The dwindling space near the top brought them in our vicinity. They
were standing on the caldron rim, and saw our black and white flag as I
tentatively waved it for Dianne. They waved their own.

We were cautious approaching one another, each suspecting an enemy
ruse. But we came together at last.

Reunion! The five of us here, with all the Togarites presumably behind
us; and father and the safety of our blessed earth close overhead. It
seemed, with Drake and Alt here with me--with Ahlma and Dianne babbling
news of what had happened to each other--that all our dangers were at
an end. It was an inexpressible relief.

We grew out of the caldron into the space above, the huge familiar
valley. I remembered it; but it seemed rather darker now than it had
been before.

With our flags out, we stood expanding. Above this valley was the upper
surface of the rock fragment. Once we got up there to the summit,
father would see us. I wondered if he would be on guard. Or Foley? Or
the other man--Ransome--whom we employed? It had only been a few days
since Alt and I left here. Days? The events which had crowded them made
them seem months to my memory.

The valley shrank and closed in upon us. A pit now.

"Drake, shall we climb out? Or wait a little longer?"

It seemed best for us to start climbing. It was no more than a hundred
feet up. Easy enough, with us three men to help the girls.

We scrambled up the rocky slope. We were halfway up when it had
dwindled so that the upper rim was barely ten feet above us. There was
light up there, and vague, blurred shadows of form in the hazy sky.

"Jump, Dianne. Here, I've got you."

We scrambled out of the closing pit, and stood a moment expanding upon
the upper surface. Jagged rock spires were around us, a broken area of
crags upon the summit of the rock. A few acres up here, and down over
an abyss was the surface of the granite slab.

The scene shrank further, and then the last drug we had taken ceased
its action. We stood on a narrow, jagged peak of rock. A slope led down
beside us to a broad, undulating plain. It was only ten feet down.

Alt stood with the girls. Drake and I were together, waving our flags.
We saw things dimly at first--the brighter light up here confused us.

"Frank, you think he sees us?"

"What is that, off there?"

There was something very strange here! A chill swept over me. Drake was
not familiar with the surroundings father and I had prepared for the
guarding of the rock, but I was. This seemed a very strange scene now!

Words choked me. I stood clutching Drake.

"What is it, Frank--what's the matter?"

This light overhead was not the light father and I had rigged up! There
was no giant microscope up there in the sky.

Vague blurred shapes of a ceiling and wall were up there, and a
light--but not our light in the guarded room of our house at King's
Cove.

This vast plain, gleaming dimly rough and undulating in the light--it
should have been our granite slab. But it was not!

Realization surged over me with a chilling rush of horror. This was a
different room. There were people here; I heard an echoing rumble of
their giant voices. But not father, nor Foley nor Ransome!

The rock fragment had been moved, stolen from father and taken
somewhere else! These were enemies, guarding the rock upon the top of
which we stood fatuously waving our little black and white flags!




                             CHAPTER XXVII

                    _The Fight on the Rock Summit_


Alt who was standing with Dianne and Ahlma, must have realized from my
attitude that something was wrong. I stood stammering, clutching at
Drake. Then I got it out.

"Hide, Drake! This isn't our room--that's not father up there!"

We swung back, and I shouted, "Alt, back!"

Alt had already drawn the girls into the shelter of an overhanging
rock. We crouched for a moment, not daring to move. Had we been seen
from above? A blast of poisoned liquid from a spray up there could
kill us here instantly. Or a monstrous finger could come down with a
swoop and mash us.

Drake murmured, "Shall we take the diminishing drug? Make a run for it,
and back?"

Failure. It beat at me. All our plans gone down into defeat. This was
defeat--death for us. A retreat into the abyss; but we would meet the
Togarites coming out! And where was father? What had happened up here?

Alt whispered, "We must get back in."

Drake gripped me. "Are you sure, Frank? Father may have changed things
around. If we go back in, without knowing--that's the end, Frank! The
end for us all; for the Mitans, depending on us. What will we do?"

The girls crouched, silent, white-faced. It was only a moment or so.
We never reached a decision--it was forced upon us. From the edge of
the rocky slope near at hand a man's head and shoulders appeared! A man
about our own size! He was climbing up from the plain upon which the
rock lay. A long bar of metal, thin as a sword, was in his teeth.

He was a hatless, bullet-headed Togarite, a heavy-set fellow, naked
to the waist, with dark hair matting his thick chest. He saw us! He
shouted and others appeared behind him. Four of them altogether.

Of us all, Alt was the one who had most presence of mind. The Togarite
shouted at us. Alt understood the words. He shoved the girls lower
behind the rock; he snatched my flag, and stood up, waving it. I caught
his words to Drake.

"They don't know if we're friends or enemies."

The rock was, as I had feared, out of father's possession. But it was
being guarded now by a method wholly different. The giants in the room
overhead had doubtless not yet seen us. They were, I guessed, not
overly alert, because four of their men in this smaller size were down
here watching for any who might come.

Instant, swift impressions. I realized that Togaro was expected. The
Togarites were coming. It would be difficult to tell a friend from an
enemy--and so the guards were put into this smaller size.

Alt waved our flag, and shouted something in his own language. The
Togarites stood in a group, twenty feet away, regarding us; four of
them, with drug belts, and armed with the swordlike bars. They seemed
impressed with our flag. They called again to Alt, and again he
answered. To us, Alt flung over his shoulder:

"Doubting us, Drake! If I get them over here, leap upon them. They are
only four."

We were three. But Drake had an automatic. He said softly, "Yes, Alt!
Closer--we must get them all. Then, if we're not seen from above--"

The Togarites were cautiously advancing. Then they must have seen
Dianne! Recognized her golden robe perhaps. They stopped, and then with
menacing shouts came running at us.

Alt flung down his flag. "Now!" He made a rush, with Drake and me after
him. Drake's automatic spat. The leading Togarite stumbled, fell and
lay motionless. The others leaped over him. Drake raised his weapon
again; but one of the Togarites flung a bar. It struck Drake's arm. The
automatic clattered away; Drake and the fellow locked together and went
down, rolling on the ground.

The other two rushed at Alt. He met them full. I was close behind him.
His fists flew; he caught one of his assailants in the face. But the
other struck with the bar. It must have landed upon Alt's head. He
crumpled.

I was gripped by the fourth Togarite--the one Alt had hit. His bar
missed me. I caught at his arm; held it, tried to wrench away his
weapon. We struggled on the uneven ground. He was a burly fellow. I
wound my legs around him, and suddenly he stumbled and fell. I twisted
and came down on top, but could not hold him. His lunge heaved me up.
I was flung sidewise, but as I scrambled, my hand seized a metal bar
which had been dropped. I clung to it.

Then the other Togarite leaped upon me. He was finished with Alt. He
jumped upon me as I was trying to rise. I rolled, with the two of them
pounding at me. The bars were thin but heavy things. I warded a blow
from my head. Then my hand with the bar hit one of the men. He fell
away from me.

I was aware of Drake shouting, "Coming, Frank!"

My remaining antagonist had me by the throat. He was half on top of me.
Beyond his ugly distorted face I saw Drake rising--and the Togarite
under him lay inert.

I was pinned. My breath was stopped. In another moment I would have
been unconscious. But Drake came with a leap. He had seized his
automatic where it lay on the rocks. The butt of it crashed against the
skull of the man over me.

My senses faded, but came instantly back. Drake was pulling the body
off me. He helped me up. Around us lay the four Togarites, motionless.
Alt was lying here also. And Alt, I thought, was dead.

Dianne and Ahlma came running forward.

We stood a moment breathless, confused, undecided what to do. The
white-faced, trembling girls bent over Alt. The blow on the head had
perhaps only stunned him. But there was a sharpened bar of metal now,
sticking gruesomely in his side.

The thing had happened so swiftly! Overhead in some strange, monstrous
room, giants were sitting. As Drake and I stood here in the silence,
victorious in this fight, but with our dead friend here, the rumble of
the talking giants overhead was plainly audible. To them, all this was
a tiny combat, fought upon a quarter of an inch of rock surface. They
had not yet seen or heard us, not realizing that anything unusual was
transpiring on the small chunk of rock at their feet. Ants may fight in
deadly combat and the human, whose shoes is their battle ground may be
all unaware of them.

I pulled myself together. "Drake, we've got to hide these bodies!
Perhaps we can avoid discovery."

There were many recesses here. We dragged and tumbled the bodies out of
sight, or at least what we hoped would be out of sight of the people
overhead.

Drake panted, "We'll have a few minutes, maybe. But they're likely to
discover that their guards are gone."

"Drake, let's not go back in. We've got to get out, Drake! Out to the
world with these drugs--and with a warning of what is coming."

"And get to father. Oh, Frank--"

He did not finish. Had father been killed?

"We'll get out," I said. "Here, put these vials in your belt, you've
got more room." We were despoiling the dead Togarites of their drug
supply. We hurried from the last one, back to where Alt lay with Dianne
and Ahlma over him. They were in plain sight from above.

"Carry him somewhere, Drake. We mustn't be seen--above everything, not
be seen. Is he dead, Dianne?"

She answered, with a surprising hushed calmness, "No, not yet. Our poor
friend!"

We lifted him up, as quietly as we could. In a small ravine with a
jutting rock above it, we laid him down.

"The best we can do, Drake."




                            CHAPTER XXVIII

                         _The Return to Earth_


"Not that way, Frank! Let's get around the back--I think it's a better
chance."

We had clambered down the ten feet of jagged rock. We didn't change
size--we had to risk it as we were, for to have got smaller would have
made the descent too great. Somehow we were not discovered. We seemed
to be on the floor of a room. A stone floor--we saw it as a ridged,
uneven rocky plain. Off in the distance was what might have been a
table, chairs, and the legs of seated men.

Ahead of us, a quarter of a mile away, was a cliff-like precipice. I
figured it to be the wall of the room. It seemed darker over there.

We ran. The rock had a small fence around it--a fence which, compared
to the normal room-size, was probably a foot or two high. We darted
through its bars. In five minutes, perhaps, we were in the shelter of
the bottom of the wall. It was seemingly of rocks and earth, piled and
plastered together. It was dank with moisture, but solid to us in this
size.

We stood a moment in the shadows here, panting from the run.

"Where do you suppose this is?" Drake demanded. "Can you make anything
out of it, Frank?"

We were secure for the moment. It was dark over here. Standing with
quiet survey I could imagine that there were three or four men off
there in the distance. That this was a room with a single light
overhead. No window on this side. The other walls were too far away to
be visible.

"The door," said Drake. "That's what we've got to find--got to get out
through it."

But where were we? Certainly this was no room in our home. It looked
as though it might be a place hastily, amateurishly built. But it was
tight. No crevices--no cracks or openings. The bottom of this wall was
plastered solid with wet mud. The air down here was dank and heavy with
moisture.

Dianne murmured, "Listen! That sounds like water."

A strange, muffled reverberating roar sounded from some great distance.
A giant sea pounding? It seemed like that. My heart sank. Why this
could be a place very far from King's Cove. The wild thought came to
me--was this an earthly sound, this muffled pounding of the sea.

I said something like that to Drake.

"Nonsense! They've stolen the rock, Frank, and built this hiding
place--probably not far from King's Cove. Where could they go?"

Dianne said abruptly, "I think this is all very small--this place
they've built down here."

It was a new idea to us. But it seemed probably true. The Togarites
would be in hiding. They had stolen the rock, made it small, and built
this tiny housing place.

Our escape was still undiscovered. Not far from us was a long, slanting
shadow--as though a table perhaps were cutting off the light. We
walked until the shadow was upon us. And by the wall along here was
a neglected pile of caked mud, large as a house to us. We found an
opening like a cave-mouth, and squeezed in.

We were momentarily safe. "You stay here with the girls," I suggested
to Drake. "I'll get large enough to see what the place looks like and
how we can get out."

A discussion in the room interrupted us. The rock was visible a quarter
of a mile away. A figure was growing upon it, expanding swiftly. A
man. He leaped from the rock. We could see him moving in the opposite
direction from us, reaching the little fence, climbing over it.

He had shouted. The distant giant shapes had sprung into action. They
seemed bending down. There was surprise, but no turmoil.

"Togaro!" murmured Ahlma.

It was Togaro. As he expanded, there was a size when, with the light
upon him, we saw him plainly. There had been no guards to challenge
him. He had come swiftly out of the rock, and was large enough when he
first shouted to enable the men in the room to recognize him. He was
standing off there now, growing to their size. We could hear the rumble
of their voices.

It changed our plans. The fact that the guards were missing would now
be discovered.

"We can't stay here," said Drake. "If they suspect us, they'll begin
searching."

Nor could we run the miles along the walls of this room, hoping to find
an open door. We decided we would have to dare a slightly larger size.
We stood in the comparative darkness beside this cake of mud and grew--

The room, in a moment, had dwindled. We huddled against its wall. We
knew that at any moment we might be discovered, but we had to take the
risk. It was a small, windowless cell to its other occupants, though
still gigantic to us.

Four men, and Togaro, stood by a table of stone. There was a closed
door in the opposite wall. Two men stood by it. A light now sprang over
it, so that the room over there was brightly illumined.

Ahlma heard them, "Togaro is saying his first party is coming out now."

They were already coming! The rock seemed much closer to us now, and
smaller. Tiny figures showed on its summit. They leaped down, they
stood expanding.

It was at once a dismaying and welcome diversion. The missing guards
were forgotten in the turmoil of the arriving Togarites. A hundred or
more of them came. The room was in confusion. They tramped about while
we shrank again into our niche. They grew large, and in parties of ten,
were checked through the door, passing under the light to the darkness
outside.

The turmoil made it easier for us. We got around the wall, near to the
door. It was a long march, for near the end when we were sure of our
direction, we shrank again to a smaller size, and kept close against
the wall so that we might not be trampled.

The Togarites were pouring now from the rock. This was the arrival of
the first thousand. They seemed so formidable as they grew gigantic and
jammed the room! Giant hordes, arriving here on earth! The conquest had
begun!

It made us realize anew that with the world harried by these giants,
possession of the drug was of vital importance. The drugs were Togaro's
chief weapons. But we four had them also. If we could get out of
here--get quickly to the authorities and deliver the drugs--it might be
the difference between defeat and victory for the world.

We may have stood there an hour. The arriving Togarites poured into the
room; they marched through the doorway in a steady stream.

But we did not dare try to slip through. The light was bright, and
there were two guards with gaze always upon the floor. From where we
lurked we could see outside; a dim vista of blurred, luminous darkness
and crowding giant figures. There was a babble of rumbling voices, both
outside and in here.

An hour passed.

Then came the chance we had felt must come at last. The bodies of the
Togarites we had killed on the rock summit were discovered! A group of
the arriving people carried them down. Togaro had been moving about the
room. His voice rang out with commands.

Ahlma translated: "He says, 'Close the door!' No more people are to
come now from the rock! Oh, Drake, they're going to search for us! They
know now that we are here!"

The guards sprang to the sliding door. But that act momentarily took
their gaze from the floor. We were, to them, a few inches high. We were
desperate. The door slid closed; but we had made a wild dash and gone
through!

We found ourselves outside, in what seemed an outdoor darkness. A void,
with a sheen of distant silver light far overhead. Giants trampling
about. We dashed for a great jagged porous column. It was wood. We hid
in one of its cave cells--a broken niche in its side. There was no
search going on out here for us. The giants were tramping about, moving
away.

Presently we dared to increase our size again, when the space out
here seemed cleared momentarily of the tramping figures. Of all the
size-change we ever experienced, I think that this was now the most
surprising. The giants in the distance seemed also growing. We could
hear them, but soon realized that another wall was between us and them.
We were, for the moment, alone.

We had taken only a taste of the enlarging drug.

"Where are we?" exclaimed Drake. "How small are we?"

The pounding of the distant sea had been louder out here. But now, as
we grew, it shrank until presently it was a murmur. Not a roar, far
away--but a murmur, near at hand. The gentle lapping of water, close
somewhere here.

And we found a tiny, mound-like house of sand and mud shrinking at our
feet. It was sheltered by an overhanging arch of rock. The room from
which we had escaped! It dwindled and was gone into smallness.

A rush of madness swept me as I saw that tiny mound. A kick of the toe
of my shoe would crush it. Kill Togaro and all his men in there. But
the madness passed. For all I knew, father might be in there. And the
rock certainly was down in there. If I stamped, that tiny grain of
rock would be forever lost. And a hundred thousand Mitan refugees were
in it, waiting for Drake to return to them with help!

Other walls closed in around us. The giants were obviously outside of
them. A floor became apparent--a floor of earth and sand, and near
by there was a vast spread of uneven wood. As we grew, it shrank to
planking. A void of darkness was beyond it. No, not darkness! A patch
of silver sheen. Water, off there. Water, with moonlight on it; water,
lapping gently under this planking on which we were now standing.

Dawning recognition was coming to us. The rough boards; walls; this
ceiling close over us, with timbered beams; this archway, with shining
water beyond it--it was the interior of our own boathouse on the shore
of King's Cove!

It was night--a calm, placid night of moonlight on the water. The
boathouse was empty, save for ourselves as at last, in a normal size to
earth, we stood in a corner.

Our dory was gone. The slip of water here was vacant. Outside the
boathouse we heard the throng of Togarites tramping about the cove!




                             CHAPTER XXIX

                        _The Theft of the Rock_


It was the night of May 14 when Alt had come from the rock with his
white flag of truce, and had taken me back into the atom with him.
Togaro had been lurking outside; he had got into our guarded room. He
had ridden me into smallness. Alt and I had not been aware of him.
Father and Foley, watching us dwindle upon our journey, had not seen
him.

But he was there; and he had leaped off me--small as an insect--and
escaped. I have recounted the incident. It was in the caldron valley,
not far below the upper surface of the rock fragment. I have described
how we met a Togaro giant, who apparently was on his way out.

It seems obvious to me now that Togaro, when he was hidden upon me
during that hour or so while Alt and I made the first stage of our
inward journey, had been able to overhear our conversation. I recall
that I told Alt then how I had arranged with father that, coming back,
we would use a black and white flag as a signal. As a matter of fact,
Togaro also was probably within our guarded room when father, Foley and
I had discussed it.

He knew, then, about the flag. He escaped from Alt and me, in the
caldron. He had seen and recognized his follower--had been clinging to
me when we encountered and fought the giant. That fellow was on his
way out, looking for Togaro, very probably, to see why the master was
delayed all those months. There must have been near by other Togarites
with him upon the journey, and Togaro escaped from us in order to join
them.

I do not know any of this to be a fact; I construct it only in the
light of what actually transpired afterward; and I think that doubtless
it is what happened. Togaro met his men, told them the rock was in
hostile hands, and told them of our flag signal. Then he ordered them
out to capture the rock from father.

I can even fancy that Togaro lingered to aid in that capture, for it
was very swiftly done; then, finding it successful, he had hastened
back into smallness. Alt and I were inept at the size-change traveling.
We made many blundering miscalculations; it would not have been
difficult for the skillful Togaro to overtake us and to hide upon our
ship as he did.

Thus Togaro, with the knowledge that the rock was in his possession,
was enabled to bring his expedition up with utter confidence. Dianne
and I had marveled at his assurance.

I think this is the true explanation. In any case, the fact remains
that the rock was swiftly captured from father. Alt and I departed
at about midnight of May 14. Father watched us go. He was depressed,
harassed, over my going. He watched until Alt and I were no longer
visible. Then he went to bed, leaving Foley on guard.

What happened to Foley, no one will ever know. Father lay in his room,
with the alarm bell beside him. He could not go to sleep for a long
time. Then he must have dozed.

He was awakened by the violent ringing of the bell. Foley calling him
that there was danger! It was near dawn; father noticed the daylight
through his bedroom windows. He had not undressed; he seized his
automatic and rushed down the hall.

He was too precipitate, confused by being awakened too suddenly.
The bell was clanging through the silent house with the urgency of a
fire-alarm. Father burst incautiously into the room where Foley had
been guarding the rock. He remembers seeing the body of Foley upon
the floor. Three or four strange men were in the room--one large, the
others very much smaller. The one of father's stature had a crudely
fashioned black and white flag in his hand--with which, undoubtedly, he
had deceived Foley.

Father fired point-blank as he blundered into the room. He evidently
missed. The man with the flag flung it. The flagstaff was a bar of
metal; it struck father's head and knocked him senseless.

Ransome was due to arrive to relieve Foley at seven in the morning. He
came and found Foley dead, with a sharpened bar like a sword impaled in
him. Father was lying there unconscious.

The room was in no disorder. Father's automatic was beside him. The
granite slab was in its place.

But the fragment of rock was gone!

This was during the week of May 15. The local authorities were
skeptical of father's story. Even with the public facts of the previous
year--the coming of the giants, the battle on Bird's Nest Island--what
father now said was incredible. This atom, within the rock, as the
source of the inexplicable "giants," was to these local officials too
much for belief. Heaven knows, one cannot blame them--especially since
the rock had vanished and no one remained who had ever seen it, or even
heard of it, save father and Ransome.

Father was taken to Portland for treatment. When he had recovered, the
authorities at Washington sent for him. Officialdom there placed more
credence in what he had to say; but not enough to do anything about it!
As a matter of fact, what could they have done?

On the night of May 20, with father still ill, and in Washington
with Ransome to give their testimony, our place at King's Cove was
unoccupied. The Togarites poured from the tiny rock, a thousand of them
in this first party. They grew into the boathouse, then left it, and
roamed over King's Cove in the moonlight, still growing.

It must have been near dawn, when the first of them came out. Togaro
was presently with them, I have no doubt. What they did was far
different from the sporadic appearance of those giants of the year
before. Organized, intelligent action now!

Shortly after that dawn of May 21, the world rang with the news that
giants had come again. In Washington, the officials with whom father
had been in consultation knew now that everything he said was the truth.

The menace was at hand! The world was fronted by the strangest, gravest
crisis of its civilized history!




                              CHAPTER XXX

                          _The World at Bay_


I can give only a broad picture of those events which followed during
May. They are history today. I saw them, as presently I will explain,
from an inside viewpoint; a narrow viewpoint indeed. But as the world
saw them, so were they now unfolded to father.

The dawn of May 21 showed giants rising from King's Cove. The first
reports were contradictory and confused. But the giants were there!
They were apparently about two hundred feet tall. A score of them at
first. Then more--a hundred or so.

The few people who lived in the vicinity of King's Cove took instant
flight. There were at first no casualties except a woman who fainted
and an aged man who died of heart failure running with his family along
the road toward Elton.

The giants did nothing menacing. They seemed busy moving about the
neighborhood. They trampled it. Cleared it. Spreading out over a mile
or so of territory along the water front. A plane passed overhead and
reported that they appeared to be occupying the territory, not in
haphazard fashion, but with a rational, methodical planning.

By noon the reports were coming in with more coherency. There had been
a few ships in the channel. They had seen the giants, and had hastily
steamed away. The passing planes brought the most detailed news. By
noon, no airplane passed King's Cove at its accustomed level. They all
were bending aside and flying high. But one or two of the passengerless
mail planes flew low enough for close observation, and within a few
hours both the American and Canadian governments were sending out
official flyers to observe and report.

There was chaos that morning. No official orders were given to attack
the giants--indeed there was no force available which dared attack
them. By noon, it was father's opinion that any organized attack, until
more was known of the conditions, would be a mistake.

The Togarites quite evidently were proceeding with definite purpose.
By noon, a line of two-hundred-foot giants were stationed at intervals
along the shore front. They stood, or sat calmly upon the cliffs. They
were half a mile apart--ten of them over a five-mile length.

Then their line turned inward. At half mile intervals they took up
their posts. A curving line, embracing the town of Elton and several
others. There had been an encounter at Elton. All the towns were
within a few hours abandoned. The whole of this five-mile area--and
ten or fifteen miles shoreward--was abandoned. But at Elton some stray
group of people had been trapped. A giant ahead of his fellows, had
come wandering up. He was shot at by rifles and shot-guns. And hit,
evidently, for he raised his leg, and he let out a cry of pain. He
kicked at a house and demolished it. But he made no effort to fight. He
stood nursing his leg where the bullets had stung it, and watched the
people as they fled away.

There was a giant stationed up every road where it entered the Togarite
territory. For a few hours, automobiles with panic-stricken refugees
occasionally dashed out. The giants let them pass unmolested.

Such were the reports that first morning. The observation planes told
that the captured area was bustling with activity. The giants seemed
unarmed, and without belts of drugs. There were not many of them. But
around King's Cove were throngs of Togarites in a smaller size--a size,
it was said, about normal to earth. They occupied our house and all the
other houses of the neighborhood. By evening they had marched to the
deserted towns.

A rational occupation of this captured territory. And it was said
that they seemed moving, and installing equipment, erecting their own
dwellings. What seemed brown, conical tents were appearing. Firewood
was being gathered. An encampment of war; with families of men, women
and children--noncombatants making themselves comfortable for a
permanent stay.

A thousand people. But soon it was obvious that they were far more
numerous than that. All day they were appearing--growing from a tiny
size. Hordes of them. By nightfall it was said that there were several
thousand. Presently it was identified that the source of them was the
Ferrule boathouse on the shore of King's Cove.

The night of May 21-22 would have been moonlit, but the moon and stars
were obscured by clouds. But the Togarites' territory was not dark.
Floodlights of some unknown current brightened it with spots of yellow
from wire grids which the giants set up at intervals. The lighting
systems of the captured towns were out of commission, but the Togarites
quite evidently had their own power.

A weird scene of activity by night. There were camp fires everywhere.
The area was thronged with the arriving enemy. Unearthly, fantastic
scene! It was an encampment of little people, patrolled by watchful
giants.

By the morning of the twenty-second, the Togarite lines had spread. A
single giant--five hundred feet tall perhaps--made a rush southward.
As though to clear the territory, he ran toward Portland--came to its
outskirts, stopped and strode back. There had been an exodus from
Portland the day before, and few were left in the city. The giant did
not enter. He went back the way he had come--along the coast--leaving a
trail of devastated towns in his wake.

I think that this giant may have been Togaro himself, for the reports
said that he wore a belt of drugs--and several times was observed
to change his size. His foray was doubtless to make sure that the
territory southward was clear of inhabitants. Then his lines came down.
The giants marched calmly along the coast--with a similar line of them
some ten miles inland.

The city of Portland was occupied by the Togarites on the 23rd of May.
It was an orderly advance, made during the night.

The next day, the lines again moved southward.

I find it difficult in these limited pages, to portray a broad enough
picture. A myriad abnormal events were taking place throughout the
world. I can only sketch them at random. The organized dissemination of
news, for which our age is famous, proved now a grave menace to public
safety. The giants, in those first few days, probably actually killed
not more than a few hundred people. But the broad-casted news that
giants were upon earth--human enemies capable of growing to limitless
size--that fact publicly known was responsible for the death of many
thousands.

There were panics--street crowds trampling their fellows--thousands of
miles from any giants. A disorganization of all normal activity. But it
was worst, of course, in eastern Canada, and the Atlantic seaboard of
the United States. In New England it was chaos. A flight, with cities
abandoned, roads thronged with refugees, transportation overloaded.

Trains, vessels, and the air lines struggled to cope with broken
schedules and a mad rush of frenzied passengers. Accidents of every
sort were reported--but in the mass of extraordinary happenings with
which the news-tape was jammed, they passed almost unnoticed.

Within a few days, when it became evident that the enemy was moving
southward, Boston was depopulated, as was all of Cape Cod, and every
city and village along the coast.

Father stayed in Washington. He had immediately advised against a
premature attack of Togaro. Even had Washington overruled him, no
attack could have been made in those first days, for every official
thought and effort was absorbed by the need of transportation. Millions
of people were routed from the threatened territory. This was unlike
any war the world had ever known. Advancing enemy armies had always
found the great bulk of the civilians remaining in captured territory.

But there was no living soul willing to remain within a hundred miles
of these giants. A psychological terror--and the very real danger of
being trampled upon.

Transportation was of vital importance. Government airplanes, ships,
soldiers and police were all absorbed in helping the people to escape.
There was little thought of attacking this enemy.

Yet there had been sporadic encounters. A battleship had put into
Boston harbor, with the intention of helping transport the people. A
giant, ahead of his fellows, had come wading down the coast. There
were still some people in the city of Lynn. He stamped upon them,
and wrecked the snug little city, green and beautiful in the spring
sunlight. Within five minutes it was a burning mass of wreckage. Then
the lone giant came on southward.

The battleship, whose commander perhaps felt that he was trapped,
turned and steamed out of Boston harbor. Then it faced the giant, and
shelled him from a distance of a few miles.

The giant, whose head and shoulders were some fifty feet above the
ocean as he waded near shore, was struck and killed. His body stained
the water, lashed it to bloody foam with his dying struggles.

But from the north another giant rose. Again I think it must have been
Togaro. He grew to a size monstrous and came leaping down the coast.
Some reports have it that he was a thousand feet tall; others say still
higher. He bounded from one village to another in a single leap. Then
he dived into the ocean and swam.

The battleship was trapped by the hook of Cape Cod. It fired a single
broadside--and missed, for the swimming Togaro saw the smoke-puff of
the guns, and dived in a watery cataclysm.

He came up close to the ship. He flung an arm over it. Like a toy, the
great battleship up-ended, was heaved up into the air, and sank.

There were a few survivors, for Togaro ignored them as though they were
ants struggling in a pond. He turned, swam north--waded ashore and
dwindled into the northern distance.

No more attacks were made on the Togarites by sea. This act of
reprisal--so obvious, and so successful--gave the government pause.

But there was, that same day, an attack by a group of Canadian planes.
Whether it was officially planned or not I cannot say. A group of
planes, six or eight of them, came down from the border and flew over
the enemy territory.

This was now about five o'clock in the afternoon. The giants stared
up at the invading planes, but did not seem to heed them. The planes
were emboldened. Perhaps the pilots figured that these giants could not
grow upward fast enough to overtake them. A plane could rise in a few
moments to a height of fifteen or twenty thousand feet. No giant could
do that.

The little squadron of lead-colored war planes flew into the heart of
the Togarite territory. The center of it, at this time, was inland from
Portland. The planes came low--and one of them dropped a bomb from a
height of under a thousand feet. It struck one of the standing giants.
Wounded but probably did not kill him.

The planes zoomed up and away. They dropped other bombs. One fell into
the city of Portland.

But none of the planes escaped. These supposedly unarmed giants were
most efficaciously armed--with the sling-shot! I have already had
occasion to mention it. In the hands of a two-hundred-foot giant, it
was a sling thirty or forty feet long. It flung, not a pebble, but a
rock huge as a bowlder, with a speed almost of a bullet.

Giants leaped into action beneath the soaring planes. To them, the
planes were toys, flying only a few times higher than the length of
their own bodies. With skilled marksmanship they flung their rocks. The
planes were struck. One by one they came crashing down.




                             CHAPTER XXXI

                           _Togaro Strikes_


Father sat that night in the War Department at Washington. He had
been in constant consultation with the authorities, for he, more than
any one in the world, could explain what manner of people were these
Togarites. Yet even father knew very little.

"We can't stand up against warfare like this!" exclaimed the war
secretary.

There were orders given that night that under no circumstances were
the Togarites to be attacked. Reprisal by the enemy was too easy--too
efficacious.

Additional warnings to the public were issued. The enemy was moving
slowly southward--the territory in advance of them was ordered
abandoned. No need to enforce such orders! A wave of refugees rolled
back, a hundred miles in advance of the slow-moving giant lines.

Indescribable scenes of confusion and terror marked those days toward
the close of May. The Togarites moved largely at night; every dawn
found them farther south. They crossed Massachusetts, and Rhode Island.
The 1st of June found their outposts well into Connecticut, following
the north shore of Long Island Sound. New Haven was trampled by a
single giant, on June 1--the city wrecked in an hour.

There were changes now in the enemy tactics. In Maine they had been
careful not to demolish the cities unduly. Their own people were
settling there. But now, farther south, only the active warring giants
advanced. They laid everything waste beneath their monstrous tread. An
area a hundred miles wide had been wholly abandoned days before. The
advancing giants waded into it; stamping, kicking--firing it by night
with great torches. A blackened, wrecked swath of country stretched
down from Maine.

The giants were larger now. As their territory expanded they took
a larger size. It was systematically done. Each seemed to have his
post--a few miles over which he paced back and forth--with one of his
fellows coming south at intervals to relieve him. And the reliefs were
always larger--with more miles of country to pace. By June 1 it was
estimated that they stood some five hundred feet tall.

On June 1 they had reached Long Island Sound barely a hundred miles
from New York City, where millions of people, in all the chaos, were
still unable to get away. Giants had already crossed the Hudson. One of
them stood in the river and lunged against Bear Mountain Bridge until
he tore it loose.

For all that the United States and Canada did not dare attack, there
were frantic preparations for war. The battle planes were made ready.
The Canadians were massed on the border--and a great fleet of American
planes assembled in New Jersey. Artillery units were mobilized.
Infantry would be useless. It was used now to aid the flight of the
civilian population. The evacuated areas in advance of the giants were
always under martial law, patrolled by soldiers who retreated slowly
before the oncoming enemy.

The forts of the Highlands near the Hook--entrance to the port of New
York--were ready to do what they could; and the forts at Wadsworth, on
Staten Island, were ready.

The Atlantic battle-fleet was massed in the Chesapeake. The Pacific
fleet was hastening through the Panama Canal.

Resistance seemed so useless! By virtue of size alone, this enemy was
irresistible. Monstrous, terrible weapon of size! No one, contemplating
it, could even have approximated the terror of the reality.

Yet it seemed horrible to do nothing. Father describes innumerable
conferences in Washington, where the harassed government strove to
plan what might be done. Nor was our government alone. The world was
at stake. Every foreign government was frightened, offering help and
advice.

Help was coming. Transport planes, bringing volunteers from Britain,
were daily arriving. They flew the far-south route--landed in the
Carolinas, and were rushed North.

A united, civilized earth opposed this enemy of giants. But to realize
the desperate futility of it, one had only to envisage it from the
giant viewpoint. A little, miniature world, like an anthill, outraged.
Why, a single giant--Togaro alone--if he made himself large enough,
could destroy this anthill activity!

Father recalls how our war secretary gripped him. "But what does he
want, Ferrule? This Togaro--conquer us? God, man, we can't yield up
our whole country! Our whole earth! Does he want to exterminate us?
Why doesn't he say something, communicate with us, make demands--an
ultimatum--terms for surrender--something! Anything, but not this
gruesome silence!"

Father was silent. But to him came the wistful thought of Drake, Dianne
and me. He wondered where we were--if only we would come back to him!
If we had the drugs, and brought them now, the earth might be saved.

Warfare, with both sides using the drugs, would be terrible indeed.
It might, probably would, destroy the world of its own momentum. Then
there came to father with a flash of divination, the true aspect of
what might happen if our earth forces had the drug. Togaro's giants
never wore the drug-belts. Father could guess why. It was a weapon too
powerful, so that Togaro did not dare entrust it now even to his own
men. One, for instance, might be wounded, and in a frenzy take too much
of the drug and run amuck, destroying all his fellows.

But there was another reason. A giant had already been killed. His body
was floating in the ocean off Boston. Other giants might be killed. The
Earth forces might get possession of the drugs.

Father wondered where the main drug supply was kept. Probably, he
concluded, it was all upon Togaro's person. One man, controlling
everything.

Father divined what might happen if the earth forces had the drugs. A
general attack by our planes, our armies and navies, could be made. It
might take the giants by surprise. A thousand of them--there seemed
only that many--might be overcome. If Togaro could be separated from
them so that they could be kept from growing larger, the earth-giants
might fight with Togaro the combat of size.

Wild and desperate thoughts these. But father had them; and he prayed
wistfully that Drake and I might come and bring with us the drug that
would offer this last desperate hope.

This was the night of June 1 and 2. The dawn of the 2nd brought a new
menace. In the ocean, far off at the curving eastern horizon beyond
Sandy Hook, the head and shoulders of a giant loomed into the sky.
No, not a giant, this--a titan. A monstrous, titanic thing in human
form. Togaro! No one had seem him arrive. He swam down from Cape Cod,
doubtless, in the darkness just before dawn, expanding as he swam.

And now he stood some twenty miles offshore. A mountain in the shape of
a man off there. To observers at the sea-level he was standing beneath
the curve of the horizon. And his torso loomed mountainous into the
sky. A thousand feet? A mile? There are no eye-witnesses who can agree.

He stood a moment, and then he waded toward the Hook, and spoke. It was
a rumble like distant thunder. It was heard all up and down the coast.
Words blurred--but he said them over slowly. And they were heard, and
then distinguished.

"I will talk now. I will tell you what to do."

The news was flashed to Washington. In the fort at Sandy Hook the
commander of some gun-crew lost his wits and fired a shot. It struck
Togaro in the shoulder. He stood with surprise and anger. Then he
stooped and reached fumblingly into the ocean. He plucked up a dripping
mass of rock and heaved it--a rock huge as the fort. It fell upon the
Hook; the fortifications were buried beneath it.

There is no one who can tell with any coherency what happened in those
next minutes. No one in New York could have seen more than the feet
and towering legs of the infuriated titan as he bounded with splashing
steps up the harbor. He wrecked the forts on Staten Island. He splashed
into the upper bay and leaned over lower Manhattan. The Woolworth
Building--a little toy reaching to his knees. The higher domes newly
built along the Battery--they may have towered to the height of his
thighs. He kicked at them. The falling masonry and steel fell into a
litter at his shoe-tops--crashed and fell with what to him was a tiny
clatter and a cloud of dust and smoke surging to his waist. He waded
into it, for only a minute. Inconceivable wreckage!

He turned and strode back. A few of his leaps carried him down the
harbor, churning up the Narrows, splashing through the Lower Bay,
wading again into the ocean. The dawn was still behind him as he stood
there. And again his roaring voice sounded:

"That will teach you not to attack me. Now I will tell you what to do!"

The incredible, inconceivable power of size!

An hour passed. Father was routed from his bed. In the War Department
he found a throng of officials. The representatives of a dozen foreign
governments were there. A turmoil with no attempt at any rational
conference. The building rang with shouts:

"We must yield! This is madness. Hopeless."

A single enemy, armed only with the weapon of size, yet it was hopeless
for all the world to try to fight him!

Togaro was still standing under the morning sky. His words were heard
in New York, and flashed by wire to Washington.

"I command that you leave the United States. Take your people out of
it as quickly as possible. I will not interfere with your retreat. I
command you to sail the warships of your world--anchor them off the
coast of Maine so that I may sink them."

He gave a score of details. He spoke for what was perhaps ten minutes.
He ended:

"If you yield, send a plane now as a signal. Let it come near me--so
that I may catch it in my hand. I will not kill its pilot."

There was a sudden heavy silence in that War Department room when the
message came. Then some one said:

"Shall we yield?"

It meant giving over the whole world to this tyrant. Every man in the
room knew it. And would it help? The wreckage at Lower Manhattan--those
ten minutes just now at dawn--would yielding up the world spare other
scenes like that? Or would this monster be insatiable?

"Shall we yield?"

The white-faced men whispered it to each other. The fate of their
whole world, now in this breathless moment to hang upon their hasty,
frightened decision.

They were spared the necessity of answering. A secretary burst in from
the adjacent corridor.

"Ferrule! Dr. Ferrule!"

A message for father! A telephone from Mount Vernon in the northern
suburbs of New York City, close now to the enemy lines.

Drake Ferrule had been found! He and a strange girl named Ahlma! They
were safe. A plane had been sent to them, and they were coming to
Washington.

And the message for father, from Drake:

"Don't yield! We're coming with the drugs."

Under the strain of it, the war secretary broke. He burst into an
hysterical laugh. "Don't yield! Why, of course we won't yield! Attack
them now--we're ready!"

The orders went out. Father tried to stop it. "Wait! Get the drugs
first!"

But in the pandemonium around him he was unheeded. The attack had long
been planned. The war planes were ready, massed in all the Jersey
airports. The artillery units were ready. The roads and the railways of
New Jersey were open and ready for swift transportation.

An attack upon the Togarite lines where they crossed, west of the
Hudson, at the New Jersey border!

And off in the ocean beyond Sandy Hook, the titanic figure of Togaro
stood waiting for his answer. But now, behind him, farther out and to
the north, other huge figures were swimming! He did not at first see
them. Two figures--expanding as they swam, coming to attack him! Then
one of them stood on the ocean bottom; stood upright, towering into the
sky. A figure almost as huge as Togaro.

The figure of a girl! A girl in a golden robe!




                             CHAPTER XXXII

                            _The Fugitives_


It was near the dawn of May 21 when Drake and I, with Dianne and Ahlma,
crouched in our boathouse at King's Cove. Giants seemed everywhere
outside, towering figures in the moonlight, tramping about the cove.

I think that our best chance to escape from the Togarite territory was
offered us there at the beginning--those first minutes just before
dawn. We had the drugs. We might have plunged into the channel,
swimming out, expanding our size and taking the chance that we would
not be discovered too soon.

How easy to look back on what one might have done! But instead of that
we crept from the boathouse and turned inland. Ran back from the cove.
Past our house; Togarites in our normal size were thronging it.

We were confused. Behind us, giants were rising everywhere. People were
pouring from the boathouse.

"If we can get to Elton--" Drake panted. We found the road and dashed
along it. The moon was momentarily under a cloud. The concealing
darkness was helpful.

A giant went past us. We ducked off the road. He did not see us--he
strode toward Elton.

We started again. Then the moon came out. We did not dare use the open
road. We skulked through the fields. Then the moon was paling with the
coming dawn. We had not escaped. Giants were ahead of us, and to the
sides.

We crouched by a fence and argued. If we got large, we might in a few
moments dash out of this captured territory. But we would be seen at
once--pounced upon.

If we got smaller, we would be safe from discovery.

But Drake was vehement against it. "Damn it, Frank, I've had enough of
that! It'd be a journey of a hundred miles just to Elton, when we're
smaller! I tell you we've got to get out of here quickly! Frank, these
drugs are vital to the world."

It seemed that our best chance was in our normal size. The dawn came.
We found a dilapidated barn on a side road halfway to Elton. We hid in
it.

We were, with the daylight upon us, hopelessly caught within the
Togarite lines. It was soon obvious that getting to Elton would not
help us. Giants were already there. We thought, if we could head
inland, but then south, toward Portland, we might get past them.

So many things we might have dared to do are apparent, looking
back upon it now! We struggled--all those days in May--to get to
civilization somewhere, to find transportation south to New York. We
had the vital weapon--the one thing the world could successfully use
against this enemy. Because it was so important, we were afraid to
chance anything. If Togaro caught us, the world was doomed. Terrible
responsibility! An excess of caution was upon us.

We skulked and hid by day, and traveled at night. But there were always
giants around us. Patrolling watchfully in the daylight, and at night
with their lights and torches. It seemed that we could never escape
those widening lines. Within a day or two we realized that we should
have headed north; but it was too late now to change.

We tried to get to the coast. It was too dangerous; there were more
giants that way than anywhere else. We had a hundred narrow escapes
from capture. It was a problem to find food and water as we went. But
there were deserted houses into which we slid by night.

Once we found an abandoned automobile. We ran it southward, all one
night, dashing forward, stopping with lights out and silent motor when
a giant approached. Then on again--until at last we barely were able
to fling ourselves from it and take the diminishing drug, when a giant
came up, stooped and tossed the car into the air. We lay in the bushes
by the roadside and dwindled in size until the danger was past.

We lost count of the days on this strange flight. And we lost our
way--wandered, following what roads we dared, working southward by
what devious routes I have no idea. It seemed a hopeless journey. The
country was now a torn mass of wreckage. Littered, burning towns. Roads
obstructed. No storm of nature could ever devastate a countryside like
this!

After more than a week of wandering, it seemed that we were still as
far inside the spreading Togarite lines as ever. We had stolen garments
to disguise the girls. We had several times tried getting larger. One
dark night, when it chanced that the lights of the giants were not
too near us, we traveled in a fifty-foot size for hours. It gained
us so much distance that we tried it again several times. We passed
inland from Boston, crossing into the desolation of what had been Rhode
Island, then into Connecticut.

There came a night which, though we did not know it, was the evening
of the 1st of June. We lay in the wreckage of a farmhouse which had
been demolished. The girls were too exhausted to travel farther, and we
all needed a rest. It had been the most fearful day of our trip. That
morning we had been driven out of our hiding place where we intended to
spend the daylight hours. It was an abandoned house near the edge of a
town. What town I do not know.

Marauding giants had come and burned the town. We had escaped into
smallness. It was night when after desperate efforts, we again emerged
to find ourselves barely a hundred feet away from where we had been
before.

The night came. We could not travel farther. One of us had always
to be awake on guard. The girls were bravely standing the hardships,
but they were both in miserable plight. They lay now, huddled in this
shattered farmhouse. The broken roof was like a tent over us. We
had had a meal, of food picked up along the way. We decided not to
travel until the next night. The girls wrapped themselves in the men's
overcoats we had found for them. They were soon asleep, huddled amid
the litter of plaster and lath strewn around us.

Drake and I sat whispering. Drake wore now a single automatic. The
girls and I were unarmed. The automatic was a futile weapon--a thousand
times Drake cursed its futility; never once had we found any rational
use for it.

"Where do you suppose we are, Frank?"

We had but the vaguest idea. But it was not far from the coast--Long
Island Sound lay a mile or so off there.

"Not far from New York," I said. "This might be near Norwalk."

We had often been able to locate ourselves by broken street signs in
the wrecked towns. At night sometimes, when we were in the fifty-foot
size, we would poke about to find a railroad station which would have
its name upon it.

It seemed now that the outposts of the captured territory must be close
ahead of us. A line of standing giants had been visible down there.
They had not yet entered New York City, we felt sure.

"We'd better try and get to the coast," Drake said. "If it weren't for
the girls--" He shot a glance toward where they were sleeping. "Frank,
I wish we'd been able to find a plane, take a chance on getting out of
here with one dash--"

"Well, we haven't found one," I retorted. There had been many, but
they were all wrecked. "Besides, Drake, we decided that would be too
dangerous. You remember those Canadian war planes."

We had seen that episode. We saw, indeed, so many strange things which
I have no space here to mention!

I added: "If we had a plane we'd no more than get it into the air
before we'd be struck. You know that."

He paused, then reached a sudden decision. "Frank, we'll rest here.
But tomorrow night I'm going to make a break for it. You stay with the
girls. They can't travel much farther."

He shot another glance at them. Was Dianne awake and listening to us
now? I think so. I seem to recall that she stirred. But at the time we
did not notice.

Drake went on vehemently. "We've got to do something--get the drugs to
Washington. Why, Frank, in a few days New York City will be gone."

"What do you mean, make a break for it?"

"You stay with the girls. Keep hidden. No use to try to travel. Get
yourself food and water and dig in somewhere and wait. And I'll get
out--I can do it, Frank, alone."

"How?"

"Get large. We'll get over by the coast. I'll make a dash for it,
swimming. They won't see me until I'm large enough to put up a fight.
Frank, it should have been done long ago."

He was my older brother, I could not talk him out of it. And it did
seem the only thing left for us to do.

"You go to sleep, Frank. I'll stand guard for awhile."

"You're not going to try it tonight?" I demanded, with anxious
suspicion.

"No."

"You promise?"

"Yes, of course. I'm tired as hell. Go to sleep. We'll stay here all
tomorrow."

Sleep came always to us the instant we relaxed. But this time, as
though fate would have it so, I awakened within a few hours.

"Drake?"

"Yes."

He was sitting beside me; the girls were still asleep.

"Take your turn, Drake. I'm wide awake." He needed no urging. He rolled
up near me without a word.

I sat motionless. We were half outdoors; the tilting fallen roof only
partially covered us. I could see the stars.

I presently went outside. A starlit, moonless night, a few hours before
dawn. No giants seemed in sight. A deserted, desolate, shattered
countryside, wan and pitiful in the starlight. The thought flashed to
me: might we not make a break for it now? No giants were near here at
the moment.

But we had often tried that before, and there always was a giant within
sight of us when we dared get larger.

I went back under the broken roof. Out of its other side, where the
shattered wall had left a jagged opening, a small dark form was running.

Dianne! I caught a glimpse of her golden robe beneath the flap of the
dark overcoat.

I stopped for nothing, but ran. Outside I called softly, "Dianne! Where
are you going? Come back!"

There was a dim road. She was running along it.

I called again, but she did not stop, so I dashed after her.

I was overtaking her at first; then her strides lengthened and she drew
away from me.

I gasped with horror, and fumbled at my belt. She had taken the drug;
her running figure on the starlit road was growing larger!




                            CHAPTER XXXIII

                        _The Combat of Titans_


I need not concern these pages with further details of Drake and Ahlma.
I have already made it clear that they escaped that same morning. Drake
awakened, just before dawn, to find that Dianne and I were gone. He
and Ahlma rushed outside. There was a commotion off by the coast. They
stared at it, half understanding. Drake soon realized that his best
move would be not to follow me.

He and Ahlma ran the other way, and took the fifty-foot size. They
were desperate; and luck or Fate, as you will, was with them. The
patrolling giants were standing in amazement, gazing off toward Long
Island. Under ordinary circumstances of those past days Drake and Ahlma
would have been attacked in a moment. But now the giants did not notice
these fifty-foot figures running along the ground. The boundary of the
Togarite lines chanced to be near here. A fifty-foot human runs with
strides of thirty or forty feet. Drake and Ahlma, taking every chance
now, clung to the open road.

They got past the Togarite area within half an hour. The giants all
were behind them. The country was still devastated. Then the pair
passed into an abandoned area, still intact, where the giants had not
been, and crossed it.

They came at last, just after dawn, within sight of soldiers patrolling
the edge of what still was civilization. Drake took the overcoat from
Ahlma so that her robe would show. They dwindled to normal size;
encountered the soldiers.

Civilization at last! A motor car took them to where a plane was
available. Drake learned that father was in Washington--the whole
world now knew father's name, and where he was, and what he had to say!

The telephone lines here were down. Drake found a way of sending a
radiogram. But at that moment Togaro was devastating New York--in the
chaos Drake's message was never delivered. The plane landed in Mount
Vernon. Drake telephoned his message: "Don't yield--I have the drugs--"

Meanwhile, in the starlit darkness before dawn, I ran after the
fugitive Dianne. She had taken the drug--I took mine also.

"Dianne!"

She saw that she could not shake me off. She stopped abruptly. She had
cast away the overcoat because it impeded her running. I dashed up to
her golden-robed figure. The trees were dwindling beside us; the open
starlight was overhead.

"Dianne, are you crazy?"

"Go back, Frank!"

I was fumbling for the other drug. I pulled at her, but she resisted me.

"Frank, go back. Not two of us--Drake said one was best--he said it to
you. He did say it. Frank, I mustn't stay here--I must run--run--"

But still I held her. She exclaimed:

"If you try to stop me, I'll call out!"

"Dianne, you promised me you'd be careful--not try a wild thing like
this." I shook her. "Did you promise?"

"Yes. But I've changed my mind."

A madness was on her. She fought to escape me. "Let me go! Oh, Frank, I
can make it! I can run very fast, and I know how to handle the drugs."

"No!"

"Then you come with me."

We were head and shoulders above the trees now. Across the dwindling
fields I could see the open water of the Sound. A giant was to one
side, a mile or so. He had seen us!

It was too late to retreat. Suddenly Dianne jerked away from me. I ran
beside her, saying:

"We'll head for the water, straight over the fields."

"Yes, Frank."

A dozen giants who yet were larger than ourselves were near at hand,
running at us.

Then they stopped and stared off toward Long Island. A monstrous figure
rose up in the distant ocean; stood a moment, and then plunged again.
Togaro, swimming down to New York!

Dianne recognized him. "Togaro!"

"Yes. Alone! Dianne, I think he's got all their drugs."

"We must get larger than he is!"

The water off Long Island Sound spread close ahead. Off to one side,
down by our feet, a wrecked little village lay in the starlight. We
were bounding along--Dianne ran like a fawn.

Giants--diverted momentarily by watching Togaro--were now closing in
upon us. One fellow in advance of the others barred our way. I ran at
him. His sling whizzed a pebble at me. It struck my shoulder. My fist
caught his jaw. He toppled backward into the Sound. Dianne went past
him, splashing.

I caught up with her. The other giants had retreated. They had no
drugs, and we were now taller than they. Their slings flung a rain of
pebbles after us.

We waded the Sound. The giants on Long Island kept away from us. We had
grown well over five hundred feet now, and bounded across the little
width of the island.

The dawn was coming. We stood gazing out over the placid ocean; it
lapped with a foaming line of ripples on the narrow beach.

Togaro was down by Sandy Hook. His monstrous figure loomed up against
the fading stars. He had not seen us, evidently. There was no way that
these frightened giants near here could communicate with him.

We took more of the drug.

"If we can get as large as he is, Dianne--"

She pulled me down so that we crouched along the empty length of beach.
A giant behind us flung a bowlder. But to us now it was small as a pea.
It stung my face where it struck.

"Let's try swimming down," I murmured. "Take it slowly and wait until
we get large enough to attack him."

My heart was thumping so that it seemed almost to smother me. This
would be the supreme test. These Togarite giants to me now were
dwindling pygmies. They had none of the drug. Helpless, futile little
enemies. The Togarite hordes up in Maine? Why, they would soon be small
as ants. The Earth forces, hovering on the outskirts of this little
patch of devastated country, were only excited little gnats.

I laughed with a touch of hysteria as the power of my size surged over
me.

"Dianne, all that back there amounts to nothing. We can control it.
There's only Togaro!"

Just that single enemy left. We heard the rumble of his voice. We saw
him stride toward New York City--his head and shoulders towering over
the horizon level.

We swam beside a dwindling shore front.

"Dianne, you must keep close behind me."

Fear for her came upon me again. We were both unarmed, but so was
Togaro, very probably. There was only the weapon of size.

"Don't go so fast, Dianne. Look, he's coming back from the city! Are we
large as he is?"

She was swimming ahead of me.

"Try standing up, Dianne. See if you can wade yet. Dianne, wait! Keep
behind me, I tell you!"

She was a faster swimmer than I. She did not heed me. The curve of the
tiny island was beside us. A cove, with a headland a few feet high, was
to our right--the entrance to New York harbor. A line of buoys, smaller
than fishing bobs, lay on the water to mark the ship channel.

Togaro was farther out in the open sea. My foot touched the ocean
bottom.

Dianne suddenly stood up. Then Togaro turned and saw us!

I called: "Dianne! Come back!"

Togaro was still somewhat taller than Dianne. He was what seemed a
hundred feet from her. I was swimming frantically, twenty feet or so
behind her. She and I were growing; and I saw Togaro's hand go to his
mouth. He had taken more of the enlarging drug!

He stood for just an instant, surprised by our presence. Then he
shouted:

"You! Why--"

She made a rush forward, and dived into the water. With all my strength
I swam. Togaro moved sidewise, then came at me. But Dianne suddenly
appeared, rose up at his waist, where the water surged, and gripped him.

He bellowed: "Dianne--let go of me, you fool!"

She must have tripped him. He went down, splashing, roaring. I saw him
strike her and heave her off.

I had stood up. The water was below my waist now. The little headlands
of the land seemed only a few hundred feet away. I waded, and as
Togaro shook Dianne loose and heaved himself upright, I closed with him.

He was a full head taller. His powerful arms went around me, bending me
backward. His evil face leered at me.

"So, Frank Ferrule? You want to make a test like this? I'll kill you
now--as I should have long ago."

He was horribly strong. His arms were crushing me. We were both
expanding. We swayed and struggled, lashing the water white around us.
His drug belt, with its water-tight metal vials, pressed against me.
One of his legs went behind me, but I twisted, avoiding being thrown.

The water level was receding. It was down to our knees now. I
straightened and got a hand under Togaro's chin. He suddenly cast me
loose, and as I staggered and almost fell he leaped upon my back,
forcing me down.

We had surged away from Dianne. I called frantically: "Dianne--keep
off! You make it harder for me."

I found myself bent down by Togaro's weight, so that I was half
sprawled upon a tiny shore front. A little line of cliffs the size of
my hand. Fortifications here--a child's toy fort, smashed by a chunk of
rock lying upon it.

I sprawled. There were humans here, frantic little insects running.

I managed to get up and twisted again to face Togaro. I got a blow in
the face as we broke apart. But I gave one in return, then I hit him in
the chest and ducked his swing.

Blood from my forehead where his knuckles had cut was in my eyes. I
dashed it away.

I was more agile than Togaro with my fists; unskilled, yet I soon saw
that I had more science than he. I gave him two blows for one, at the
least. He staggered over and tripped on the cliffs of the shore.

But I knew it was a ruse. He had tried to clinch with me, but I was
avoiding him. He knew I had him at a disadvantage if I could keep him
away. He half fell, but instead of following I stepped backward. Dianne
was beside me.

"Get back," she cried.

She had found a rock on the ocean bottom. She heaved it, dripping, at
Togaro as he rose. It caught his shoulder, but did not seem to hurt him.

I gasped: "Dianne--back, for God's sake."

She obeyed me and retreated.

Togaro came at me again.

There was an instant as I stood there, waiting with raised fists to
receive him, that a horrible sense of dizziness swept me. I felt myself
standing a mile or two in the air. I could see down the lower bay, the
Narrows--and see the wrecked buildings of Manhattan. All far below me,
as though I were poised in a plane--this whole familiar scene dwarfed
into miniature by my altitude.

Then my viewpoint changed. I was of normal size, standing here in a
foot or two of water. This, at my feet, was a little green and brown
model of New York harbor.

Togaro was rushing me. He hit me in the body. As I went a step backward
from the impact he tried to grip me. But I was too quick; and as he
rushed he launched a swing which, had it caught my chin, would have
finished me. I ducked it. He slewed around with the effort. Then I hit
him in the forehead. He stood swaying, then fell.

I was afraid to go near him. I stood away. He was up again in a moment.
But there was a difference now. I was taller than he! My dose of the
drug was still effective, but his had stopped!

He knew it was the end; defeat. I was ready with a blow that would
have finished him, and he knew it. The expression on his face held me
transfixed for an instant. A stupid, bewildered surprise. But that
faded. There came something else. A look of regret as he flung a glance
down at the tiny landscape? Regret, as he saw Dianne crouching behind
me? If it were that, it was instantly gone. His hand went to his mouth!

A trick? But he leaped backward, flung up his arms with a gesture that
stopped me again. He was staggering. He stood swaying, with one foot
upon the few inches of the cliffs. The blood was draining from his face.

He had taken poison--his last titanic gesture!

He stood, and upon his livid, contorted face came a twisted leer of
irony.

"Dianne, you win." From his belt he plucked a small globe of metal.
"You win--but your--damned Mitans--lose!"

The fragment of rock was in that little globe! I knew it! As I leaped
he flung the gleaming sphere over my head. It rose in an arc and fell
into the sea. It must have burst with the impact. There was a puff.
Within it, the tiny grain which held the Mitan world was lost forever.

Togaro kept to his feet a moment longer. He gasped again:

"You win--damn you both!"

Then he crumpled limply and fell at our feet, his monstrous body
crashing down across the Highlands, and his head and shoulders sprawled
far into the Lower Bay!




                             CHAPTER XXXIV

                       _Princess of the Cottage_


It seems that there is not much more I need record. A year has passed.
It is summer again, and but for the fact I have lived those scenes over
in my memory as I set them down here, they would seem remote indeed.

There was a mild turmoil, that morning of the second of June when
the titanic body of Togaro came crashing down. Wild scenes of a tiny
battle. But it was over almost before it started. Only the war planes,
of all the earth forces, had time to get into action. They soared over
the Togarite lines. But there was no courage left in the giants. They
had no drugs. It was as we thought--Togaro kept upon his person the
entire supply. The giants had seen his monstrous body fall--

They fought. Some of them were killed by the planes--and some of the
planes were brought down. Then Drake entered the battle. He had seen
from his rising plane at Mount Vernon what was transpiring. He hastily
landed and took a heavy dose of the enlarging drug.

The giants fled before him.

The thing was over almost before Dianne and I could stride across the
intervening tiny landscape to reach Drake. He had trampled some of the
giants. But most of them he spared.

There was a day of wild confusion; but the Togarites were ready enough
to do what they were told.

They were herded by Drake and me into Maine, then were reduced to
normal earth size.

There is an island now where they, and the forty thousand followers
with them, are isolated. Dianne and I have never been there. Dianne
wants to forget the Mitans--those of her loyal people who were lost
within the rock fragment.

The futile dragging of the Atlantic Ocean off Sandy Hook has proved
unavailing. The rock must have been no larger than a grain of sand in
that fragile globe which Togaro cast away. It is gone forever.

The drugs, too, are gone. The authorities very wisely decided it was
too dangerous a thing to be allowed to exist on earth. The entire
supply unanalyzed has been chemically destroyed.

It is June again now. One would hardly know that all these strange
things happened only a year ago. The devastated area up through New
England is looking better every week that passes. The countryside is
green again in the summer warmth; the wrecked cities are repeopled and
being rebuilt.

There was a gruesome task for Drake and me. In monstrous size we
carried the dead body of Togaro as far out into the ocean as we could
wade, then fastened rocks to it, and a rope. Then, swimming, we towed
it a thousand miles farther and sank it into the ocean depths.

We want to forget all that now. When this narrative is finished--as it
will be in a moment--I want to forget it forever. That was the past;
the future holds so much of peace and beauty.

There is for me the glory of Dianne and her love.

We are living in a cottage by the sea. Drake and Ahlma live near
us. Father is in New York. He says he would not live with a married
couple--even with such beautiful and amiable daughters-in-law as Ahlma
and Dianne. But he visits us often.

There is nothing of the princess about Dianne now, save that she is
princess of our little cottage. We have no servant. When our family is
larger we will have one, but just now Dianne is playing at housekeeping.

She was in here half an hour ago, urging me to stop my writing.

"It's nine o'clock, Frank. Bright moonlight. I'm going to build a fire.
Camp fire--I've got clams. We'll bake them for Ahlma and Drake when
they get back from the pictures."

"Right, Dianne. Go do that."

"But, Frank--"

"Get it started. Remember your signal fire on Bird's Nest? Let's make
the signal again--like we used to when we were kids--"

"Come on."

"Can't--but I'll be through soon."

She went away, but she came back after awhile.

"The fire's built. Come on, Frank."

I imagine I ignored her. But she came again, just a minute ago.

She called in: "Oh, Frank!"

"Yes, Dianne?"

"Come on. Please stop."

"Presently."

"Frank Ferrule, you can make your own smoke signals for Drake and
Ahlma. I'm going to bed."

I think I had better stop.


                                THE END

       *       *       *       *       *

                     A SCIENCE-FICTION MASTERPIECE

A beautiful girl comes from nowhere to warn a world against a dreadful
peril--Giants rise up out of the sea to threaten unsuspecting cities
and towns--And two young men battle an Atomic Napoleon to save their
girls from his lustful clutches and a world from his greedy ambitions.

AMAZING--the journey through smallness to a world of the atomic hidden
in the heart of a meteor!

STARTLING--the destruction of a planet by one man's wrath!

ASTOUNDING--the invasion of America by an army of giants tall as the
Empire State Building!

PRINCESS OF THE ATOM is a long-sought masterpiece by a leading
imaginative writer, Ray Cummings. This unusual novel introduces the new
series of AVON FANTASY NOVELS, designed for the millions who enjoy the
new thrill of Science-Fiction.

RAY CUMMINGS, author of "Princess of the Atom," has been called "the
dean of fantasy writers." As assistant to Thomas A. Edison, he became
well-grounded in science and its potentialities, and has since achieved
a distinguished reputation as an author of outstandingly imaginative
novels and short stories.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PRINCESS OF THE ATOM ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


