The Project Gutenberg eBook of Flora of the Sudan
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Flora of the Sudan

Author: A. F. Broun
        R. E. Massey

Contributor: J. Hutchinson

Release date: March 19, 2025 [eBook #75659]

Language: English

Original publication: London: Sudan Government Office, 1929

Credits: Galo Flordelis (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLORA OF THE SUDAN ***

                           FLORA OF THE SUDAN


                           Flora of the Sudan

                                   BY
                              A. F. BROUN,
               _Formerly Director of Woods and Forests_,

                                  AND

                             R. E. MASSEY,
                         _Government Botanist_.

 _With a Conspectus of Groups of Plants and Artificial Key to Families_

                                   BY
                         J. HUTCHINSON, F.L.S.,
                      ROYAL BOTANIC GARDENS, KEW.

                               * * * * *
         _Published with the consent of the Sudan Government._
                               * * * * *

                            Obtainable from
                THE CONTROLLER, SUDAN GOVERNMENT OFFICE,
                   WELLINGTON HOUSE, BUCKINGHAM GATE,
                             LONDON, S.W.I.
                         PRICE P.T. 50 or 10/-
                                 1929.


                            MADE IN ENGLAND
                                   BY
           THOMAS MURBY & CO., 1, FLEET LANE, LONDON, E.C.4.




                                CONTENTS


                                                                  PAGE

  PREFACE                                                          vii

  ABBREVIATIONS                                                      x

  GLOSSARY OF BOTANICAL TERMS                                        1

  CONSPECTUS OF PRINCIPAL GROUPS OF PLANTS AS ARRANGED
  IN THIS FLORA                                                     15

  KEY TO THE FAMILIES OF DICOTYLEDONES                              16

  KEY TO THE FAMILIES OF MONOCOTYLEDONES                            45

  SYSTEMATIC ENUMERATION OF FAMILIES, GENERA AND SPECIES:—

    Gymnospermæ                                                     48

    Angiospermæ:—

      Dicotyledones                                                 49

      Monocotyledones                                              365

  INDEXES TO NATIVE NAMES:—

    Arabic Names                                                   486

    Hadendowa  „                                                   490

    Rashida  „                                                     491

    Nuba  „                                                        491

    Dinka  „                                                       492

    Jur  „                                                         493

    Golo  „                                                        493

    Bari  „                                                        494

    Hameg  „                                                       494

    Nuer  „                                                        495

    Shilluk  „                                                     495

    Burun  „                                                       495

    Bongo  „                                                       495

    Zande  „                                                       495

    Krej  „                                                        496

    Indogo  „                                                      496

    Tuku-Tuku  „                                                   496

    Kaliko  „                                                      496

    Makraka  „                                                     496

  INDEX TO GENERIC NAMES                                           496

  INDEX TO FAMILY NAMES                                            501




                                PREFACE


In the Appendix of his Report on the Forests of the Sudan, published in
1901, Mr. C. E. Muriel, of the Imperial Indian Forest Service, gave a
list of the more common trees and shrubs and of a few other plants,
together with short descriptions and statements on their uses and
economic value, also their Arabic and, where possible, the Hameg names.

At the end of that year the Sudan Government gave me the appointment of
Director of Woods and Forests. At that time only few of the volumes of
the Flora of Tropical Africa had appeared and the earliest ones were
already antiquated. During the numerous journeys taken by me in various
parts of the Sudan, my wife and I were able to collect a large number of
plants, making at the same time notes of their names in various
languages of the Sudan, and their economic and other uses. I also
received considerable help, as regards Golo names, from the late Mr. S.
Skirmunt, then Deputy Inspector of Forests in the Bahr el Ghazal
Province. By 1906 I had gathered sufficient material both from my trips
and from the Kew Herbarium to draw up a rough “Catalogue of Sudan
Flowering Plants,” giving short descriptions, a number of vernacular
names and some economic and other uses, many of which were obtained from
Watt’s Dictionary of Economic Products.[1] As it was somewhat hastily
got up it was printed by the Sudan Government not for general
circulation, but for the use of Sudan officials only.

During the years which followed, up to my retirement in 1910, I was able
to add to the list a considerable number of names both scientific and
vernacular. I am indebted for the help I received, as regards Kordofan
plants, to Mr. H. B. MacMichael, of the Sudan Civil Service, and, as
regards the Red Sea littoral, to Mr. Cyril Crossland, at that time
Marine Biologist to the Sudan Government.

After my retirement Mr. R. E. Massey was appointed, in 1912, Sudan
Government Botanist, and I had the good fortune of securing his co-
operation in bringing out a more complete Catalogue of the Flowering
Plants of the Sudan. Mr. Massey, by his presence on the spot, and by his
technical knowledge, has been able to give to the present Catalogue a
greater completeness and finish than I should have been capable of
unaided; he was also able to get further assistance from other persons
in the Sudan. He particularly and gratefully acknowledges the help he
received from Mrs. Crowfoot, wife of Mr. J. W. Crowfoot, Director of
Education, in a variety of ways, such as collections of plants,
Hadendowa and other vernacular names, and drawings and paintings of
plants. A number of Dinka and Shilluk names were also given by Mr. H. C.
Jackson, of the Sudan Civil Service, and Nuer names by the late Major
Stigand. A collection of plants of the Burun country, with their
vernacular names, was received from Dr. Kamar, of the Egyptian Army, a
further collection by Mr. Sillitoe, superintendent of Gardens, Khartoum,
from the Lado District, and one from Admiral Lynes, C.B., C.M.G., in
Darfur, mostly in the region of the range of mountains, called Jebel
Marra, which attains an elevation of over 10,000 ft., and bears a flora
quite distinct from all other parts of the Sudan.

The Catalogue was at first compiled without any descriptive matter, but
Mr. R. Hewison, Director of Agriculture and Forests, Sudan Government,
speaking on behalf of that Government, which is defraying the costs of
printing this book, expressed an opinion that it would be more useful to
officials in the Sudan if short descriptions were added. In order,
therefore, to supply these as quickly as possible we depended very
largely on descriptions in the Flora of Tropical Africa, which we
shortened considerably. My wife and I worked this out as far as and
including the Cyperaceæ, and Mr. Massey undertook to do the grasses,
part only of which have as yet appeared in the Flora. He desires to
acknowledge the aid received from Mr. C. E. Hubbard in the preparation
of the key to the Grasses. Mr. J. Hutchinson kindly helped us with
plants in the Kew Herbarium which have not been described in the Flora.
But a further acknowledgment is due to Mr. Hutchinson. He has regrouped
the Natural Orders according to the system described in his recent book,
_The Families of Flowering Plants, I. Dicotyledons_,[2] and has also
furnished a key to the Classification, thus bringing this book into line
with all the African Regional Floras which are to be taken in hand. He
has also consented to look over the proofs. Our most cordial thanks are
due for his help.

My wife has been constantly associated with me in my share of the work
from the time when we collected material in the Sudan until now, and
deserves also to earn her share of whatever credit may be given for this
work.

Finally, I wish to record the debt of gratitude which we owe to Dr.
Hill, Director of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, to Mr. Cotton, the
Keeper of the Herbarium, to Dr. Stapf, the late Keeper, and to the Staff
of the Herbarium, most particularly Mr. C. H. Wright, Mr. Dunn, Miss
Hughes, and Mr. Skan for the numerous acts of kindness and help which
they have given us, making thus our work light and pleasant.

                                                          A. F. BROUN.

“OAKLANDS,”

    AMPTHILL,

      _Dec. 18th,_ 1925.


Note.—Owing to various causes, for which we are not responsible, the
printing of this book has been considerably delayed. Mrs. Crowfoot, to
whom reference has been made above, is now bringing out a companion
volume to this, containing drawings of various plants from the Northern
and Central Sudan.

My dear wife, who shared all my work, died on the 11th April, 1927.

                                                          A. F. BROUN.

AMPTHILL,

    _March 20th,_ 1928.




                             ABBREVIATIONS.


  ab.              stands for  about

  acumin.             „   „    acuminate

  alt.                „   „    alternate

  anth.               „   „    anther or anthers

  artic.              „   „    articulate

  cal.                „   „    calyx

  capit.              „   „    capitulum

  caps.               „   „    capsule

  cm.                 „   „    centimetre

  cor.                „   „    corolla

  diam.               „   „    diameter

  excl.               „   „    excluding

  filam.              „   „    filament or filaments

  fl.                 „   „    flower or flowers

  fld.                „   „    flowered

  fol.                „   „    foliolate

  foll.               „   „    follicle or follicles

  fr.                 „   „    fruit or fruits

  ft.                 „   „    foot or feet

  hermaphr.           „   „    hermaphrodite

  heterog.            „   „    heterogamous

  homog.              „   „    homogamous

  hypog.              „   „    hypogynous

  in.                 „   „    inch or inches

  incl.               „   „    including

  infl.               „   „    inflorescence

  interpet.           „   „    interpetiolar

  invol.              „   „    involucre

  l.                  „   „    leaf or leaves

  lanc.               „   „    lanceolate

  lin.                „   „    linear

  obl.                „   „    oblong

  obov.               „   „    obovate

  opp.                „   „    opposite

  pan.                „   „    panicle or panicles

  ped.                „   „    peduncle or peduncles

  pedic.              „   „    pedicel or pedicels

  per.                „   „    perianth

  pet.                „   „    petiole or petioles

  rac.                „   „    raceme or racemes

  recept.             „   „    receptacle

  segm.               „   „    segment or segments

  st. or sta.         „   „    stamen or stamens

  stip.               „   „    stipule or stipules

  suborbic.           „   „    suborbicular

  undershr.           „   „    undershrub




                      GLOSSARY OF BOTANICAL TERMS


=abruptly pinnate=, when the leaflets are arranged in pairs along the
rhachis of a compound leaf without a terminal one.

=acaulescent=, without stem or apparently so.

=accrescent=, applied to a calyx or corolla, enlarging after flowering.

=achene=, a dry indehiscent, one-seeded fruit.

=acicular=, needle-like.

=aculeate=, prickly and pointed.

=acuminate=, narrowed at the apex into a long point.

=acute=, tapering to a sharp point.

=-adelphous=, suffix used to show the number of bundles of stamens there
are in a flower where these are joined by their filaments; see
=monadelphous=, =diadelphous=, =polyadelphous=.

=adhesion=, the union of dissimilar parts of a flower, _e.g._, calyx and
ovary.

=adnate=, attached through their whole length, usually the smaller to
the greater.

=adpressed=, see =appressed=.

=æstivation=, the arrangement of sepals and petals in bud.

=agglomerate=, crowded together in a bunch.

=alternate=, applied to leaves when only one issues from each node and
the next above or below is on another side of the stem.

=amplexicaul=, when a leaf, stipule or bract embraces the stem.

=ampulliform=, flask-shaped.

=andrœcium=, the male organs of a flower, considered as a whole.

=-androus=, suffix used to show the number of stamens, _e.g._,
pentandrous, with 5 stamens.

=annual=, a plant which lives only one year.

=anterior=, in front.

=anther=, the upper part of a stamen, bearing pollen.

=anticous=, foremost.

=apetalous=, flowers without petals.

=apex=, the tip.

=apiculate=, with a small hard point at the tip.

=appressed=, pressed close to something else.

=aril= or =arillus=, a fleshy covering of some seeds.

=aristate=, when the point of a leaf is fine like a hair.

=articulate=, jointed and separating freely.

=ascending=, sloping upwards.

=auricles=, appendages at the base of the leaf-blade.

=awn=, a thread-like extension of a seed or other organ (as in barley).

=axil=, the angle formed at the attachment of a leaf or a flower to the
stem.

=axillary=, arising from the axil.

=axile=, of ovules when attached to the central axis of the ovary.

=barren=, when a flower produces no seed or pollen.

=basifixed=, when an anther is attached by its base to the filament.

=berry=, a pulpy fruit containing one or several seeds.

=biennial=, a plant living for two years only.

=bifid=, 2-cleft.

=bipinnate=, when the divisions of a pinnate leaf are again pinnate
(_e.g._ =Acacia=).

=bipinnatifid=, when the segments of a pinnatifid leaf are also
pinnately lobed.

=bipinnatipartite=, when the segments of a pinnatipartite leaf are also
deeply and pinnately lobed.

=biternate=, when the parts of a ternate leaf are also ternately
divided.

=blade= (or =lamina=), the upper, usually broader part of a leaf.

=bract=, a small leaf, usually differing from foliage leaves in shape or
colour, at the base of a flower stalk; also the divisions of an
involucre.

=bracteoles=, the last minute bracts under each flower.

=bud=, a leaf or flower before it opens.

=bulb=, a modified, usually underground stem, more or less globose in
shape, clothed with succulent leaves or scales (_e.g._, the =Onion=).

=caducous=, falling off early.

=calyptrate=, with hood-like covering on flower or fruit.

=calyx=, the outer envelope of a flower, made up of sepals.

=campanulate=, bell-shaped.

=cancellate=, resembling a grill, or latticed.

=canescent=, hoary.

=capillary=, hair-like, very fine.

=capitate=, arranged in a head.

=capitulum= or =head=, when several sessile (or nearly so) flowers are
collected into a compact head-like cluster at the end of the axis.

=capsule=, a dry dehiscent seed-vessel composed of 2 or more carpels and
usually containing several seeds.

=carpel=, the leaf of one of the leaves forming the ovary.

=caudate=, produced at the apex into a long, tail-like appendage.

=cauline=, growing from the stem.

=cell=, a unit of plant growth, also a subdivision of the ovary, _e.g._,
5-celled ovary.

=ciliate=, fringed with long hairs.

=circinate=, rolled up like the top of a bishop’s crozier.

=cirrhate=, with curled or forked tendrils.

=cladode=, a flattened branch taking on the appearance and functions of
a leaf (_e.g._, =Asparagus=).

=clavate=, club-shaped, _i.e._, cylindrical, but getting broader at the
apex.

=claw=, the narrowed base of a petal.

=club-shaped=, see =clavate=.

=coccus=, 1-seeded carpel of a dehiscent fruit.

=column=, applied to stamens and style when confluent, as in
=Asclepiadaceæ= and =Orchidaceæ=.

=compound inflorescence=, when an inflorescence, such as a =raceme=,
=umbel=, etc., is subdivided into subsidiary inflorescences, and forms a
=panicle=, =compound umbel=, etc.

=compound leaf=, when a leaf is divided into segments right down to the
midrib, so that each segment forms an individual =leaflet= which can
drop off by itself at the fall of the leaves.

=connate=, when two or more like-parts of a flower are united.

=connective=, the portion of the anther which unites the two cells.

=connivent=, converging.

=cordate=, heart-shaped, _i.e._, of a leaf, with 2 rounded basal lobes
and ovate, unless otherwise mentioned.

=coriaceous=, thick and tough, like leather.

=corm=, a bulb-shaped solid underground stem, in which reserve material
is stored.

=corolla=, the inner envelope of a flower (not always present), made up
of petals.

=corona=, a crown-like excrescence between corolla and stamens.

=corymb=, a raceme, the lower pedicels of which are gradually lengthened
so as to bring all its flowers on the same level.

=costate=, ribbed.

=cotyledon=, one of the (or the) first seed-leaves.

=crenate=, with rounded teeth.

=crenulate=, with small rounded teeth.

=culm=, the stem of =Bamboos=.

=cuneate=, wedge-shaped.

=cuspidate=, tipped with a sharp point.

=cyme=, an inflorescence in which the flowers are produced centrifugally
on successive lateral axes.

=deciduous=, applied to plants whose leaves are all shed at a certain
season of the year.

=decompound=, several times subdivided or compound, applied to leaves or
inflorescence.

=decumbent=, spreading horizontally, then turning upwards.

=decurrent=, applied to leaves, the margins of which run down the stem
below the insertion of the petiole.

=decussate=, when leaves are in pairs successively at right angles to
each other on the stem.

=dehiscent=, splitting (of fruits to let out the seeds).

=dentate=, dog-toothed, _i.e._, with teeth of equal sides.

=denticulate=, finely dog-toothed.

=diadelphous=, of stamens when they are joined by their filaments into
two groups, _e.g._, some of the =Papilionaceæ=.

=diandrous=, with 2 stamens.

=dichotomous=, applied to a stem, branch or inflorescence which forks
again and again.

=dicotyledons=, with two seed-leaves.

=didymous=, divided into two lobes, in pairs.

=didynamous=, with two long and two short stamens.

=diffuse=, widely and loosely spreading.

=digitate=, applied to a compound leaf, the leaflets of which spread
like the fingers of a hand.

=diœcious=, of plants the stamens of which are in flowers on one
individual and the ovary and style on another.

=disc= or =disk=, the receptacle on which are set flowers in a
capitulum, as in =Compositæ=, or at the base of the ovary within the
flower.

=disc-florets=, the regular tubular florets of certain =Compositæ=,
which, if accompanied by ligulate florets, occupy the centre of the
disc, while the latter are on the rim and called ray-florets.

=distichous=, arranged in the same plane, _i.e._, at two right angles to
each other.

=divaricate=, widely spreading.

=drupe=, a fleshy indehiscent fruit containing a “stone” in which the
seed is enclosed.

=echinate=, covered with prickles, like a hedgehog.

=elliptical=, shaped like an ellipse, oval.

=emarginate=, notched, usually at the apex of a leaf or petal.

=ensiform=, sword-shaped.

=entire=, applied to the margin of a leaf which is not toothed or
notched.

=epicalyx=, applied to a row of bracts, sometimes joined together,
outside the calyx, _e.g._, some of the =Malvaceæ=.

=epigynous=, apparently seated upon the ovary.

=epipetalous=, applied to stamens seated on the petals.

=epiphyte=, a plant which grows on another without being parasitic,
_e.g._, some =Orchids=.

=evergreen=, applied chiefly to shrubs and trees which bear leaves all
the year round.

=exserted=, protruding, applied chiefly to stamens which show outside
the flower.

=exstipulate=, having no stipules.

=extra-axillary=, from outside the axil.

=falcate=, scythe- or sickle-shaped.

=fascicled= or =fasciculate=, in bundles or tufts.

=fastigiate=, with parallel erect clustered branches.

=fertile=, capable of bearing fruit, applied also to stamens bearing
pollen.

=-fid=, a suffix, meaning split, _e.g._, =bifid=, split in two,
=trifid=, split in three, etc.

=filament=, the stalk of a stamen.

=filiform=, thread-like.

=fimbriate=, with a fringed margin.

=flabellate= or =flabelliform=, fan-shaped.

=flexuose=, bent alternately to right and to left.

=floccose=, with tufts of wool.

=foliaceous=, having the appearance or texture of leaves.

=follicle=, a carpel opening at the inner suture only, _e.g._, some
=Asclepiadiaceæ= and =Apocynaceæ=.

=-foliolate=, used to denote the number of leaflets, _e.g._,
=trifoliolate=, with 3 leaflets, etc.

=free=, not united.

=fruticose=, shrubby.

=fugaceous=, falling off early.

=funicle=, the stalk attaching the seed to the placenta.

=fusiform=, spindle-shaped.

=gamopetalous=, when all the petals of a corolla are united.

=gamophyllous=, when the leaves of a perianth are joined together.

=gamosepalous=, when the sepals of a calyx are joined together.

=geminate=, in pairs.

=gibbous=, swollen or humped on one side.

=glabrate=, almost hairless.

=glabrous=, smooth, without hairs.

=gland=, an organ of secretion, represented by a small lump, which is
sometimes stalked and called a =stipitate= gland.

=glandular hairs= are hairs which are enlarged at the top and contain a
viscous secretion.

=glaucous=, with a bluish waxy bloom.

=glochidiate=, applied to hairs or bristles hooked at the top.

=glume= is one of the bracts enclosing the flowers of sedges and
grasses.

=glumule=, the bract which forms the exterior covering of each flower of
a spikelet in grasses.

=granular=, covered with numerous minute excrescences.

=gymnosperms=, plants whose ovules are naked, _i.e._, not enclosed in
carpels, _e.g._, =Gnetaceæ= and =Cycadaceæ=.

=gynæcium=, the female organs of a flower.

=gynobasic=, of a style when it arises at or near the base of the ovary,
_e.g._, =Labiatæ=.

=gynophore=, applied to the receptacle below the ovary when elongated
and stalk-like.

=-gynous=, suffix used to show the number of carpels in an ovary,
_e.g._, trigynous, with 3 carpels.

=habit=, the habitual shape of a plant as it stands.

=habitat=, the locality which a plant selects for growing in on account
of suitability of climate, soil, elevation, etc., etc.

=hastate=, halberd-shaped, applied to leaves the basal lobes of which
are pointed and turned outwards at right angles to the axis of the leaf.

=head=, see =capitulum=.

=herbaceous=, tender and green, not woody.

=hermaphrodite=, applied to flowers having both male and female organs.

=hilum=, a scar on a seed showing the place of its attachment to the
fruit.

=hirsute=, with long, rough hairs.

=hispid=, with stiff hairs or bristles.

=hoary=, with short white hairs or down.

=hyaline=, glass-like, transparent or translucent.

=hypocrateriform=, salver-shaped, applied to a corolla when it expands
in a flat manner.

=hypogynous=, applied to a flower, the sepals, petals and the stamens of
which arise beneath the pistil.

=imbricate=, overlapping like the tiles of a roof.

=imparipinnate=, pinnate with an uneven number of leaflets.

=indefinite=, without fixed number, usually meaning a large number (of
sepals, petals, stamens, etc.).

=indehiscent=, applied to fruits which do not split to allow the seed to
escape.

=inferior=, applied to an ovary means that it is enclosed in and
adherent to the calyx.

=inflorescence=, the manner in which flowers are arranged on a plant.

=infundibuliform=, funnel-shaped.

=internode=, the portion of a stem between the point of attachment of
two successive leaves, if alternate leaves, or pairs of leaves, if they
are opposite.

=interrupted=, when applied to an inflorescence means that portion of
the axis bears no flowers although there are some both above and below.

=involucel=, the involucre of a secondary umbel.

=involucre=, a whorl of bracts, sometimes united and sometimes in
several rows below an inflorescence or an individual flower.

=involute=, rolled from the back, _e.g._, towards the upper surface of a
leaf.

=irregular=, applied to a flower which cannot be divided into two equal
sections in whatever direction from above it is cut.

=-jugate=, in pairs, _e.g._, bijugate in 2 pairs, trijugate in 3 pairs,
multijugate in many pairs, etc.

=keel=, the (more or less) united two lower petals in =Papilionaceæ=;
also applied to straight longitudinal nerves on bracts, sepals or
petals.

=labiate=, lipped, referring to the shape of the corolla or perianth.

=laciniate=, cut about, ragged, applied to leaves, the lobes of which
are narrow and irregular.

=lamina=, the blade or broad part of a leaf.

=lanceolate=, lance-shaped, applied to leaves about three times longer
than broad, broadest below the middle and tapering to the apex.

=latex=, milky sap.

=leaflet=, a subdivision of a compound leaf, _q.v._

=legume=, the seed-vessel of =Leguminosæ=, 1-celled and 2-valved.

=lepidote=, covered with small scurfy scales.

=ligulate=, strap-shaped.

=ligule=, a kind of stipule embracing the stem of grasses where the
sheath gives way to the blade of the leaf.

=ligulifloræ=, a section of the =Compositæ=, the florets of which in a
head have all a strap-shaped corolla.

=limb=, the broader part of a leaf, but more commonly the broader part
of the corolla above the tube, where it expands.

=linear=, narrow and long with parallel margins.

=lip=, a long more or less pendent corolla lobe or petal as in
=Labiatæ=, =Orchidaceæ=, etc.

=lobes=, the divisions of a simple leaf or calyx or corolla or fruit.

=lobulate=, having minute lobes.

=-locular=, divided into compartments or cells, _e.g._, trilocular =
3-celled.

=lodicules=, hyaline or fleshy nerveless scales in grasses, representing
the perianth of the flower.

=lunate=, crescent-shaped.

=lyrate=, applied to a pinnatifid leaf with a broader rounded terminal
lobe and smaller, shorter ones below, _e.g._, some =Cruciferæ= and
=Compositæ=.

=marcescent=, withering on the plant without falling off, _e.g._, the
flower of =Dombeya=.

=membranous=, thin and not stiff.

=-merous=, used to show the numbers of parts in each floral envelope,
_e.g._, trimerous, having 3 sepals, 3 petals (if any), 3 stamens, and
(or) 3 carpels.

=monadelphous=, when all the stamens are joined by their filaments, thus
forming a sheath round the ovary, _e.g._, =Malvaceæ=, some =Leguminosæ=,
etc.

=monandrous=, with one stamen.

=moniliform=, or beaded, repeatedly constricted, _e.g._, the pod of
=Acacia arabica=.

=monocotyledon=, having only one seed-leaf, _e.g._, =Palms=, =Grasses=,
=Sedges=, =Lilies=, etc.

=monœcious=, a plant having separate male and female flowers on the same
individual, see =diœcious=.

=mucronate=, terminating abruptly in a short stiff point or =mucro=.

=multifid=, divided distinctly into many parts.

=multipartite=, divided deeply into many parts.

=multisect=, divided so deeply into many parts that the individual parts
are practically divided off.

=muricate=, covered with short, sharp protuberances.

=naked=, applied to a flower means that it has no calyx or corolla,
applied to a seed that it has no pericarp.

=-nate=, a suffix showing that 2 or more leaves, etc., are together,
_e.g._, binate, 2 together, ternate, in a whorl of 3, etc.

=nectary=, an organ secreting sugary fluid within the flower.

=node=, the point of attachment of a leaf to a stem.

=nodose=, applied to roots and stems swollen at intervals, knotted.

=nut=, a dry indehiscent fruit with a hard woody pericarp.

=ob-=, a prefix which used with terms denoting shape (excepting oblong)
means that the shape is inverted; _e.g._, =oblanceolate= or =obovate=
applied to a leaf mean that the broader part of the leaf is towards the
apex as if it had been inverted, =obcordate= inverted heart-shaped, with
the lobes at the apex.

=oblong=, elongated elliptic.

=obtuse=, blunt.

=ochrea=, a membranous sheath, _e.g._, some =Polygonaceæ=.

=opposite=, applied to leaves means that these are inserted in pairs,
one leaf on either side of the stem.

=orbicular=, round, circular.

=organ=, every part of a plant which has a distinct function to perform.

=ostiole=, small aperture as, _e.g._, into the receptacle in =Ficus=.

=oval=, of the same shape as the mathematical figure.

=ovary=, one or more carpels enclosing one or more ovules.

=ovate=, somewhat egg-shaped in outline, flat and scarcely twice as long
as broad, broadest below the middle.

=ovoid=, applied to bodies of three dimensions, _e.g._, ovaries and
seeds, which are egg-shaped.

=ovule=, the early condition of future seeds within the ovary.

=palate=, part of the lower lip which closes the mouth of a ringent
corolla; _e.g._, in =Snap-Dragon=.

=paleaceous=, chaff-like.

=paleæ=, inner bracts or scales in =Compositæ= or =Gramineæ=, see also
=valvules=.

=palmate=, applied to a simple leaf divided like a hand into several
lobes.

=palmatifid=, more deeply divided than the former.

=palmatipartite= or =palmatisect=, palmately divided to the root of the
main ribs.

=pandurate= or =panduriform=, fiddle-shaped.

=panicle=, when the axis of an inflorescence bears branches having two
or more flowers, when the term is used alone it usually means a compound
=raceme=, a =cymose= panicle has the branches in cymes, a =corymbose=
panicle has them in corymbs and so on.

=pappus=, an appendage consisting of a ring of hairs or scales round the
top of a fruit, _e.g._, some of the =Compositæ=.

=parasite=, a plant living on the sap of another plant.

=-partite=, deeply divided, see =pinnatipartite=, =palmatipartite=,
=pedatipartite= and =multipartite=.

=patent=, open, spreading at right angles to the axis.

=pectinate=, finely divided like the teeth of a comb.

=pedate=, applied to a compound leaf when the divisions are at first
ternate, but the outer branches are forked and the outer ones of each
fork again forked.

=pedatifid=, applied to a simple leaf divided in a similar way to a
pedate leaf.

=pedatipartite= or =pedatisect=, when the divisions are practically to
the main nerve.

=pedicel=, the stalk of a flower in a compound inflorescence.

=peduncle=, the stalk of a solitary flower, or of an inflorescence.

=peltate=, applied to a leaf which is more or less orbicular and the
petiole of which is inserted not at the lower margin but near the
centre.

=perennial=, when the life of a plant lasts more than 2 years, although
the upper portion may die down to the ground every year.

=perianth=, the only floral envelope in the =Apetalæ= and in
=Monocotyledons=.

=pericarp=, the wall of the ovary when in fruit.

=perigynous=, when the corolla and stamens are borne on the calyx and
free from the ovary.

=persistent=, which does not fall off.

=petal=, a leaf of the inner envelope of a flower, often brightly
coloured, absent from certain plants.

=petaloid=, having the appearance of a petal.

=petiole=, the leaf-stalk.

=petiolule=, the stalk of a leaflet.

=phanerogam=, a flowering plant.

=pilose=, sprinkled thinly with long soft hairs.

=pinnate=, applied to a compound leaf, the leaflets of which are
arranged, feather like, on either side of the rhachis; see =abruptly
pinnate=, =imparipinnate=, =bipinnate=.

=pinnatifid=, when a simple leaf is divided into a series of lobes on
either side of the midrib.

=pinna=, in bi- or tripinnate leaves each subdivision with the leaflets
it comprises is called a =pinna=.

=pinnatipartite= or =pinnatisect=, the lobes more deeply divided than in
a =pinnatifid= leaf and reaching almost to the midrib.

=pistil=, the innermost whorl of the flower consisting of one or more
carpels, and includes ovary, style and stigma.

=pitted=, covered with small depressed spots.

=placenta=, is the part of the interior of the ovary to which the ovules
are attached.

=placentation=, the method of attachment of the ovules, _viz._, =axile=
when attached to the axis, but if this axis does not reach the top the
placentation is =free central=, and =parietal= when attached to the
inner wall of the ovary.

=plicate=, folded longitudinally like a closed fan.

=plumose=, like a tuft of long feathers, _e.g._, the leaves of a palm.

=plumule=, the leaf-bearing part of the embryo.

=pod=, a one-celled, two-valved seed vessel.

=pollen=, the fertilizing dust contained within the anther.

=pollinia= or =pollen-masses=, club-shaped collections of pollen in
=Asclepiadaceæ= and =Orchidaceæ=.

=polyadelphous=, when the stamens are united into several bundles by
junction of filaments.

=polyandrous=, with many stamens.

=polycarpous= or =polycarpellary=, with many carpels.

=polygamous=, bearing male, female and hermaphrodite flowers at the same
time on the same plant, but if on distinct plants they are =polygamo-
diœcious=.

=polypetalous= or =dialypetalous=, when the petals are free.

=polysepalous= or =dialysepalous=, when the sepals are free.

=præmorse=, as though the end were bitten off.

=prickle=, a sharp excrescence from the epidermis of a plant and not
from the wood.

=procumbent=, of a plant which lies along the ground for the greater
part of its length.

=prostrate=, when a plant lies down throughout its length.

=puberulent=, minutely downy.

=pubescent=, downy.

=quadrate=, square.

=raceme=, an inflorescence in which stalked flowers are inserted along a
central axis.

=rachilla= and =rachis=, see =rhachilla= and =rhachis=.

=radical=, springing from the root.

=radicle=, the embryo root.

=ray florets=, the outer florets, in the capitulum of certain
=Compositæ=.

=rays= of an umbel, the pedicels bearing the flowers or secondary
umbels.

=receptacle=, the short, flat, convex or conical axis on which the
flowers of a head are seated, as in =Compositæ=; also the extremity of
the flower-stalk above the calyx (also called =torus=) on which the
corolla, stamens and pistil are inserted.

=reclinate=, bent downwards.

=recurved=, bent back.

=reduplicate=, folded back.

=reflexed=, bent back abruptly.

=regular=, applied to a flower means that all parts of the floral whorls
are equal among themselves.

=reniform=, kidney-shaped.

=reticulated=, net-like.

=retrorse=, turned backwards.

=retuse=, very blunt and slightly indented.

=revolute=, rolled back, in case of a leaf towards the underside.

=rhachilla=, a secondary axis in the flowers of =Sedges= and =Grasses=.

=rhachis=, the stalk of a compound leaf bearing the leaflets; also the
portion of the axis of an inflorescence from the lowest ramification
upwards.

=rhomboidal=, applied to leaves or leaflets means more or less 4-angled
but not square.

=rostellate=, with a small beak.

=rostrate=, beaked.

=rosulate=, rosette-shaped.

=rotate=, wheel-shaped; of a corolla when the petals or lobes are spread
out horizontally from the base.

=rufous=, foxy-red.

=rugose=, wrinkled.

=runcinate=, pinnatifid with the lobes pointing downwards.

=runner=, a prostrate branch, rooting at places.

=saccate=, bag-like.

=sagittate=, applied to a leaf the basal lobes or auricles point
downwards like the barbs of an arrow.

=samara=, a winged fruit.

=sarcocarp=, the fleshy layer in certain fruits.

=scabrous= or =scabrid=, rough to the touch.

=scales=, leaves much reduced in size, but having neither colour nor
functions of leaves; also circular disc-like hairs.

=scandent=, climbing.

=scape=, a naked peduncle springing apparently from the root.

=scarious=, thin and more or less translucent, not green.

=scorpioid= inflorescence, a cymose compound inflorescence, in which, by
the abortion of one of the branches in each of the successive subsidiary
cymes, always on the same side, the inflorescence becomes curled up
somewhat like a scorpion’s tail; _e.g._, =Boraginaceæ=.

=-sect=, cut completely to the base, _e.g._, =pinnatisect= when the
lobes of a simple leaf are cut down to the midrib.

=secund=, when all the leaves or flowers are turned to the same side of
the stem.

=sepal=, one of the leaves forming the calyx.

=serrate=, sawlike, applied to the teeth on the margin of a leaf, the
point of which is sharp and the sides unequal.

=serrulate=, finely serrate.

=sessile=, having no stalk.

=seta=, a bristle.

=setaceous= or =setose=, bristly.

=sheath=, the dilated petiole of a leaf when it encloses the stem for
some distance above the node, _e.g._, =Grasses=, some =Umbelliferæ=,
etc.

=shrub=, a woody plant over 3 ft. high, which naturally branches into
several stems from near the ground; a plant with a single stem, but too
small to be classed as a tree is known as an =arborescent shrub=.

=siliqua=, a linear pod divided into 2 cells by a thin membranous
partition, from which the valves generally separate at maturity. When
the pod is short and broad it is called a =silicule=. Both are
characteristic of the =Cruciferæ=.

=simple=, applied to a leaf means that it is not subdivided into
leaflets, and to an inflorescence when the main floral axis only bears
single flowers and not subsidiary inflorescences.

=sinuate=, or =wavy= when the margins of a leaf have a wavy outline,
like an oak-leaf.

=sinus=, the space between the teeth or lobes of a leaf.

=spadix=, a fleshy spike as in the =Araceæ=.

=spathe=, a sheath-like bract enclosing the flower of some
Monocotyledons, _e.g._, in =Araceæ=.

=spathulate=, ladle-shaped, _i.e._, broad in the short upper part and
contracted below.

=spike=, a simple inflorescence bearing sessile flowers along the axis.

=spikelet=, applied to the small clusters of flowers in =Sedges= and
=Grasses= enclosed within one or more glumes.

=spine=, a woody persistent thorn.

=spur=, a conical hollow projection in the tube or lower part of a
petal, _e.g._, in some =Scrophulariaceæ= and =Orchidaceæ=.

=squamæ=, see scales.

=squarrose=, applied to imbricated scales, bracts or leaves having
pointed tips and which are also spreading or recurved.

=stamen=, the male organ of the flower.

=staminode=, imperfect and barren stamen.

=standard=, the large upper petal in =Papilionaceæ=.

=stellate=, applied to a corolla the petals or lobes of which spread out
like the rays of a star; also to branched hairs radiating from a centre.

=sterile= or =barren=, applied to stamens without pollen and to flowers
without a pistil.

=stigma=, the upper part of the pistil on which the pollen settles
before fertilizing the ovules.

=stipe=, a term applied to a stalk on any part of the plant except
leaves and flowers.

=stipellæ= or =stipels=, subsidiary stipules of leaflets.

=stipitate=, stalked.

=stipule=, leaf-like appendages, often in pairs and winged at the base
of the petiole in certain plants; when taking the form of spines they
are known as stipular thorns, _e.g._, =Acacia arabica=, etc.

=stolon=, a horizontal runner.

=striate=, marked with longitudinal lines or furrows.

=strigose=, applied to shortish hair lying close along the surface in
one direction.

=strobilate=, closely overlapping as the scales in the cone of a fir.

=style=, the portion of the pistil which bears the stigma.

=subsessile=, almost sessile.

=subulate=, awl-shaped.

=succulent=, juicy, sappy.

=sulcate=, grooved, fluted, furrowed.

=superior ovary=, an ovary which is free, _i.e._, not adnate to the
calyx or perianth.

=suture=, the line along which similar organs cohere, _e.g._, carpellary
leaves.

=syncarpous=, applied to an ovary composed of several carpels cohering
to one another.

=tendril=, a thread-like process, usually an abortive petiole or
peduncle, having the faculty of grasping and twining round objects and
thus enabling the plant to climb.

=terete=, with a circular cross section, _e.g._, a cylinder.

=ternate=, in threes, whether three leaves in a verticil or 3 lobes or 3
leaflets of a leaf, but the last two are more commonly called tri-lobed
or tri-fid and tri-foliolate respectively.

=terrestrial=, growing in the earth in contradistinction to epiphytes
and tree-parasites.

=tesselated=, marked with small squares, _e.g._, nuts of some =Sedges=.

=thorn=, usually an abortive branch petiole or peduncle with a sharp,
pointed end.

=throat=, the upper part of a corolla tube.

=thyrsus=, a compound inflorescence in which cymes, usually opposite,
are arranged in a narrow pyramidal panicle.

=tomentose=, covered with light-coloured, short, soft and somewhat
felted hairs (=tomentum=).

=torulose=, cylindrical with small swellings and depressions.

=torus=, see =receptacle=.

=tree=, a plant capable of carrying a single stem, up to about 25 ft. at
least.

=trigonous=, obtusely 3-angled.

=triquetrous=, more sharply 3-angled, almost 3-winged.

=truncate=, ending abruptly, as if cut off square.

=tuber=, a short underground stem containing farinaceous matter, _e.g._,
potato.

=tubercled= or =tuberculate=, covered with roundish knobby projections.

=tumid=, inflated, swollen.

=turbinate=, top-shaped.

=umbel=, an inflorescence in which the flowers radiate from a common
point on stalks of about the same lengths.

=umbellule=, a subsidiary umbel in a compound umbel.

=umbonate=, with a boss as on a shield.

=uncinate=, hooked.

=undershrub=, a woody plant less than 3 ft. in height.

=undulate=, applied to margins of leaves which without being cut out
rise and fall like waves.

=unguiculate=, clawed, applied to a stalked petal.

=unisexual=, of one sex only, applied to flowers which have stamens and
no pistil or _vice versa_.

=urceolate=, urn-shaped.

=utricle=, the pericarp of a nut when it is thin and loose.

=valvate=, applied to the æstivation of a corolla means that in bud the
petals or lobes are arranged edge to edge without overlapping.

=valves=, these are (_a_) the segments into which a capsule splits on
becoming ripe; (_b_) the bracts between the glumes and the =paleæ= (or
=valvules=) in the flowers of =Grasses=.

=valvules= (or =paleæ=), 2-nerved, hyaline bracts situated between the
valves (see above) and the =lodicules=.

=ventricose=, swelling or inflated.

=verrucose=, covered by wart-like lumps.

=versatile=, applied to anthers which are attached by one point on their
backs to the tips of the filaments so as to swing loosely.

=verticil=, whorl.

=villous=, having long, soft hairs, shaggy.

=virgate=, twiggy.

=viscous= or =viscid=, giving out a sticky secretion.

=vittæ=, linear vesicles, filled with oil, in the pericarp of
=Umbelliferæ=.

=wavy=, see =undulate=, also applied to =sinuate=.

=whorl= or =verticil=, 3 or more leaves or flowers arranged round a stem
on the same level.

=wing=, (_a_) the prolongation of a fruit or seed into a membrane, (_b_)
a thin membrane along the angle of a stem, (_c_) protuberances on the
rhachilla of certain =Sedges=.

=woolly=, with long loose hairs like wool.




   CONSPECTUS OF PRINCIPAL GROUPS OF PLANTS AS ARRANGED IN THIS FLORA


 =GYMNOSPERMÆ= (p. 48). Ovules naked, not enclosed in an ovary, no calyx
 or corolla.

  Plants palm-like with fusiform or globose stem; leaves pinnate;
  flowers in cones.

                                                    =Cycadaceæ= (p. 48).

  Whip-like shrub or climber with more or less whorled branches; leaves
  scale-like, connate at the base, flowers spicate.

                                                     =Gnetaceæ= (p. 48).

 =ANGIOSPERMÆ=. Ovules enclosed in an ovary; calyx or corolla usually
 present.

  =Dicotyledones= (p. 49). Embryo with 2 seed-leaves (cotyledons).
  Leaves typically net-veined. Vascular bundles of stem usually in a
  ring. Flowers mostly with parts in 4’s or 5’s—for key to families of
  this group see p. 16.

  =Monocotyledones= (p. 365). Embryo with only 1 seed leaf. Leaves
  typically parallel-nerved. Vascular bundles of the stem scattered.
  Flowers mostly with parts in 3’s—for key to families of this group see
  p. 45.




  ARTIFICIAL KEY TO THE FAMILIES OF DICOTYLEDONES REPRESENTED IN THIS
                                 FLORA.

    (Extracted and adapted from Hutchinson, _Families of Flowering
                               Plants_.)


                    KEY TO THE ARTIFICIAL GROUPS.[3]

 Gynæcium composed of 2 or more separate or nearly quite separate
 carpels with separate styles and stigmas (rarely the free carpels
 immersed in the expanded torus (Nymphæaceæ).

                                                            “=APOCARPÆ=”

  Petals present free from each other, sometimes considerably modified
  or scarcely distinguishable from the sepals.

                                                        Group 1 (p. 17).

  Petals present more or less united

                                                        Group 2 (p. 18).

  Petals absent

                                                        Group 3 (p. 18).

 Gynæcium composed of 1 carpel or 2 or more united carpels with free or
 united styles, or if carpels free below, then the styles or stigmas
 united.

                                                            “=SYNCARPÆ=”

  Ovules attached to the wall or walls of the ovary.

                                                          “=Parietales=”

   Ovary superior:

    Petals present, free from each other

                                                        Group 4 (p. 19).

    Petals present, more or less united

                                                        Group 5 (p. 22).

    Petals absent

                                                        Group 6 (p. 24).

   Ovary inferior:

    Petals present, free from each other

                                                        Group 7 (p. 25).

    Petals present, more or less united

                                                         Group 8(p. 25).

    Petals absent

                                                        Group 9 (p. 26).

  Ovules attached to the central axis, or to the base or apex of the
  ovary cell.

                                                              “=Axiles=”

   Ovary superior:

    Petals present, free from each other

                                                       Group 10 (p. 26).

    Petals present, more or less united

                                                       Group 11 (p. 33).

    Petals absent

                                                       Group 12 (p. 37).

   Ovary inferior:

    Petals present, free from each other

                                                       Group 13 (p. 41).

    Petals present, more or less united

                                                       Group 14 (p. 43).

    Petals absent

                                                        Group 15(p. 44).


   =GROUP 1. Two or more free carpels; petals present, free from each
                                other.=


 a) Leaves opposite or verticillate:

  b) Stamens numerous, 15 or more; leaves stipulate; fruits follicular
  or indehiscent, sometimes arranged on a large fleshy torus; style
  often lateral or basal.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

  bb) Stamens up to 15 in number:

   c) Herbs, often succulent; leaves often connate at the base,
   exstipulate; flowers mostly cymose; carpels the same number as the
   petals; seeds often minute, with fleshy endosperm.

                                                           =Crassulaceæ=

   cc) Trees, shrubs or woody climbers; carpels 1-3; petals often
   clawed, thin; stipules mostly intrapetiolar, often connate at the
   base; sepals often with 2 glands at the base; hairs on the leaves
   usually medifixed.

                                                          =Malpighiaceæ=

 aa) Leaves alternate or all radical:

  b) Leaves stipulate:

   c) Stamens free from one another or nearly so; fruits follicular or
   indehiscent, often arranged on a large fleshy torus; sepals
   imbricate; seeds without endosperm.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

   cc) Stamens free from one another or nearly so; fruits not on an
   enlarged torus; trees with large leaves and stellate hairs; calyx
   valvate; seeds with copious endosperm.

                                                              =Tiliaceæ=

   ccc) Stamens more or less united into a column; calyx valvate; mostly
   trees or shrubs; hairs often stellate or lepidote.

                                                          =Sterculiaceæ=

  bb) Leaves without stipules:

   c) Carpels completely sunk in the tissue of the large broad torus;
   aquatic plants with floating leaves and bright showy flowers.

                                                            =Nymphæaceæ=

   cc) Carpels not sunk in the tissue of the torus; not aquatic:

    d) Stamens the same number and opposite to the petals; carpels
    usually 3; leaves simple; fruit drupaceous; endosperm sometimes
    ruminate.

                                                         =Menispermaceæ=

    dd) Stamens alternate with the petals or monadelphous or more
    numerous than the petals:

     e) Stamens numerous (more than 12):

      f) Flowers usually hermaphrodite, mostly fairly large and
      solitary; anthers usually with a broad truncate connective; seeds
      with abundant ruminate endosperm.

                                                              =Anonaceæ=

      ff) Flowers dioecious, small; anthers with a narrow connective;
      lateral nerves of the leaves not markedly prominent.

                                                         =Menispermaceæ=

      fff) Flowers hermaphrodite, paniculate, small to medium-sized;
      anthers small, with a narrow connective; lateral nerves of the
      leaves prominent and parallel; seeds arillate; sepals persistent
      and often accrescent.

                                                           =Dilleniaceæ=

     ee) Stamens few (12 or fewer):

      f) Leaves compound or very much divided:

       g) Herbs; fruit an achene; seed with copious endosperm and small
       embryo; flowers mostly yellow.

                                                          =Ranunculaceæ=

       gg) Trees or shrubs; fruit a follicle; seeds without endosperm;
       leaves pinnate.

                                                            =Connaraceæ=

      ff) Leaves simple:

       g) Flowers hermaphrodite; shrubs or trees; seeds arillate, aril
       entire, more or less cupular; petals 5.

                                                            =Connaraceæ=

       gg) Flowers unisexual; petals and stamens in threes or multiples
       of three.

                                                         =Menispermaceæ=


    =GROUP 2. Two or more free carpels; petals present, more or less
                                united.=


 Herbs with fleshy opposite leaves; flowers racemose, cymose or
 paniculate; corolla more or less tubular; calyx sometimes inflated and
 membranous.

                                                           =Crassulaceæ=

 Trees, shrubs or climbers with usually pinnate or unifoliolate
 leaves; petals very shortly connate at the base; seeds often arillate;
 calyx never inflated.

                                                            =Connaraceæ=


          =GROUP 3. Two or more free carpels; petals absent.=


 a) Trees, shrubs or hard-wooded climbers; leaves simple or rarely
 compound:

  b) Leaves stipulate; stamens free or slightly connate at the base;
  anthers opening by slits; fruits drupaceous, included by the tubular
  calyx.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

  bb) Leaves stipulate; stamens united into a column; anthers in a ring
  around the top of the column or unequally arranged, opening by slits;
  hairs often stellate.

                                                          =Sterculiaceæ=

 aa) Herbs with radical or alternate leaves, or very soft wooded
 climbers with often opposite leaves and rather broad medullary rays in
 the wood:

  b) Carpels usually numerous, rarely reduced to 1 and then stipulate,
  often with long hairy tails; sepals induplicate valvate or rarely
  imbricate, often petaloid; stamens free; leaves sometimes opposite and
  much divided.

                                                          =Ranunculaceæ=

  bb) Carpels definite in number, often 3 or 6; flowers unisexual;
  stamens free or variously connate; climbers with simple leaves.

                                                         =Menispermaceæ=


  =GROUP 4. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules on the
   walls of the ovary; ovary superior; petals present, free from each
                                other.=


 a) Leaves opposite:

  b) Stamens more or less united into 3 or more separate bundles; leaves
  often gland-dotted or with lines of resin; mostly herbaceous; styles
  free to the base or very nearly so.

                                                           =Hypericaceæ=

  bb) Stamens free or more or less united into not more than 2 separate
  bundles (diadelphous), sometimes adnate to a gynophore; leaves not or
  very rarely glandular:

   c) Connective of the anthers produced above the cells; flowers often
   somewhat zygomorphic (irregular), the lower petal often gibbous or
   saccate at the base.

                                                              =Violaceæ=

   cc) Connective of the anthers not produced beyond the cells; flowers
   usually actinomorphic (regular) or papilionaceous:

    d) Flowers actinomorphic (regular), sessile; leaves small and
    ericoid, more or less connate at the base; stamens free.

                                                          =Frankeniaceæ=

    dd) Flowers zygomorphic (irregular); stamens diadelphous; fruit a
    legume.

                                                          =Papilionaceæ=

 aa) Leaves alternate or all radical:

  b) Stamens numerous (more than 12):

   c) Filaments more or less connate into a tube or into separate
   bundles:

    d) Filaments connate in 1 or 2 and unequal bundles; leaves compound;
    flowers mostly arranged in dense spikes or heads.

                                                             =Mimosaceæ=

    dd) Filaments connate into more than 2 separate bundles opposite the
    sepals; calyx valvate; fruits prickly.

                                                              =Tiliaceæ=

   cc) Filaments free or at most partially adnate to a gynophore:

    d) Ovary supported on a gynophore; petals often clawed; seeds
    without endosperm.

                                                          =Capparidaceæ=

    dd) Ovary sessile or very nearly so:

     e) Anthers horse-shoe shaped; ovary placentas 2; ovules numerous;
     stipules caducous, leaving a wide scar; leaves large, palminerved
     at the base; pedicels often with 5 large glands below the sepals.

                                                               =Bixaceæ=

     ee) Anthers straight or nearly so, opening by apical pores or short
     pore-like slits:

      f) Seeds hairy; ovary entire; leaves digitately nerved or lobed;
      stems annual from a woody rhizome with yellow interior.

                                                       =Cochlospermaceæ=

      ff) Seeds not hairy; ovary often deeply lobed, in fruit the
      carpels becoming nearly free on the enlarged torus; leaves
      pinnately nerved; stems not annual.

                                                              =Ochnaceæ=

     eee) Anthers straight or nearly so, opening by longitudinal slits:

      f) Flowers actinomorphic (regular):

       g) Leaves stipulate, the stipules sometimes falling off early but
       leaving a scar:

        h) Corona present in the flowers.

                                                         =Passifloraceæ=

        hh) Corona absent:

         i) Stamens and petals hypogynous:

          j) Leaves usually pinnate; wood often with resinous juice.

                                                          =Anacardiaceæ=

          jj) Leaves simple; wood without resinous juice.

                                                         =Flacourtiaceæ=

         ii) Stamens and petals perigynous.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

       gg) Leaves without stipules:

        h) Trees or shrubs; leaves never lobed.

                                                         =Flacourtiaceæ=

        hh) Herbs with milky juice; stems glaucous; leaves amplexicaul,
        pinnately lobed or sinuate.

                                                           =Papaveraceæ=

      ff) Flowers zygomorphic (irregular):

       g) Ovary of 1 carpel; trees or shrubs.

        h) Odd petal abaxial; corolla not as below.

                                                         =Cæsalpiniaceæ=

        hh) Odd petal abaxial; corolla composed of standard, wings and
        keel.

                                                          =Papilionaceæ=

       gg) Ovary of more than 1 carpel; herbs; petals often divided.

                                                             =Resedaceæ=

  bb) Stamens 12 or fewer:

   c) Stamens 6, four long and two short (tetradynamous); petals 4,
   clawed.

                                                             =Cruciferæ=

   cc) Stamens not as above, very rarely 6 and then of equal length;
   petals rarely 4:

    d) Flowers markedly zygomorphic:

     e) Fertile stamens sometimes only 2; ovary often on a short or long
     gynophore.

      f) Ovary of more than 1 carpel (_i.e._, more than 1 placenta).

                                                          =Capparidaceæ=

      ff) Ovary of 1 carpel (_i.e._, only 1 placenta); leaves usually
      pinnate.

                                                         =Cæsalpiniaceæ=

     ee) Fertile stamens usually 10 or 8, more than 2:

      f) Anthers often with a produced connective; herbs.

                                                              =Violaceæ=

      ff) Anthers without a produced connective, sometimes with a gland
      at the apex; habit various, but mostly trees, shrubs or climbers:

       g) Odd petal abaxial; corolla composed of standard, wings and
       keel (papilionaceous); ovary with a single placenta.

                                                          =Papilionaceæ=

       gg) Odd petal abaxial; corolla not as above; ovary with a single
       placenta.

                                                         =Cæsalpiniaceæ=

       ggg) Odd petal abaxial; ovary with 3 placentas; 5 fertile and 5
       barren stamens.

                                                            =Moringaceæ=

    dd) Flowers actinomorphic (regular):

     e) Flowers with a distinct corona, sometimes this membranous or
     represented by a definite ring of hairs towards the base of the
     calyx tube.

                                                         =Passifloraceæ=

     ee) Flowers without a corona:

      f) Stamens united, with the anthers in a ring around the apex of
      the column; endosperm of the seeds often ruminate; mostly weak
      climbers.

                                                         =Menispermaceæ=

      ff) Stamens free or united only at the base or rarely only the
      anthers connivent:

       g) Leaves stipulate; anthers with the connective produced above
       the cells and often connivent around the style.

                                                              =Violaceæ=

       gg) Leaves stipulate; anther connective not produced:

        h) Staminodes present, sometimes petaloid; stipules often
        pectinate.

                                                              =Ochnaceæ=

        hh) Staminodes absent:

         i) Leaves with numerous very sticky glandular hairs, mostly
         circinnately coiled in bud; seeds not carunculate.

                                                            =Droseraceæ=

         ii) Leaves without sticky hairs, not circinnate in bud; seeds
         often carunculate or arillate:

          j) Styles free to the base.

                                                            =Turneraceæ=

          jj) Styles simple or shortly divided.

                                                         =Passifloraceæ=

       ggg) Leaves exstipulate:

        h) Herbs; leaves entire or lobed; flowers yellow or orange;
        seeds pitted, arillate.

                                                            =Turneraceæ=

        hh) Trees, shrubs or climbers:

         i) Leaves simple, but sometimes deeply divided:

          j) Leaves biglandular at the base.

                                                         =Passifloraceæ=

          jj) Leaves not glandular at the base:

           k) Leaves digitately lobed.

                                                             =Caricaceæ=

           kk) Leaves not digitately lobed; calyx-tube short; stamens
           hypogynous.

                                                         =Pittosporaceæ=

           kkk) Leaves not digitately lobed; calyx-tube rather long;
           stamens perigynous.

                                                            =Turneraceæ=

           kkkk) Leaves very small and more or less ericoid; flowers in
           slender spikes or racemes:

                                                           =Tamaricaceæ=

         ii) Leaves compound:

          j) Flowers in heads or dense spikes; petals valvate; ovary of
          1 carpel; ovules more than 1.

                                                             =Mimosaceæ=

          jj) Flowers not in heads or dense spikes; ovary usually of
          more than one carpel; ovule solitary.

                                                          =Anacardiaceæ=

          jjj) Flowers racemose; ovary of 5 carpels with numerous
          ovules.

                                                             =Caricaceæ=


  =GROUP 5. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules on the
    walls of the ovary; ovary superior; petals present, more or less
                                united.=


 a) Stamens free from the corolla-tube:

  b) Ovary composed of more than one carpel:

   c) Stamens numerous, more than twice the number of the corolla lobes;
   anthers opening by longitudinal slits with broadened truncate
   connective; seeds with copious ruminate endosperm; shrubs, trees or
   climbers with exstipulate simple leaves.

                                                              =Anonaceæ=

   cc) Stamens 5-12; anthers not appendaged at the apex, usually opening
   by longitudinal slits, rarely by pores; leaves alternate,
   exstipulate; erect trees or shrubs:

    d) Leaves fairly large; flowers more or less corymbose; stamens 5.

                                                         =Pittosporaceæ=

    dd) Leaves very small and scale-like; flowers in slender spikes or
    racemes; stamens 5-10.

                                                           =Tamaricaceæ=

  bb) Ovary composed of a single carpel (usually a legume); stamens free
  or more usually diadelphous or monadelphous, often 10, rarely
  numerous:

   c) Stamens connate into a sheath or free; flowers usually
   hermaphrodite:

    d) Flowers actinomorphic (regular); petals valvate; calyx
    gamosepalous or valvate; leaves usually bipinnate, rarely simply
    pinnate; flowers often collected into heads.

                                                             =Mimosaceæ=

    dd) Flowers zygomorphic (irregular) or rarely actinomorphic; sepals
    imbricate or rarely valvate; petals imbricate, the upper (adaxial)
    one inside the others; leaves often pinnate or bipinnate.

                                                         =Cæsalpiniaceæ=

    ddd) Flowers zygomorphic; petals imbricate, the upper (adaxial) one
    (the standard) outside the others, the lateral two (the wings)
    outside the abaxial pair (the keel) which are more or less united
    along their lower edges; leaves simple, digitate or simply pinnate.

                                                          =Papilionaceæ=

   cc) Stamens connate into a column with the anthers in a ring at the
   top; flowers dioecious; fruit a drupe; slender climbers.

                                                         =Menispermaceæ=

 aa) Stamens inserted on the corolla-tube, sometimes near the base:

  b) Stamens double the number of the petals, usually diadelphous;
  flower sometimes zygomorphic:

   c) Flowers zygomorphic (irregular), often somewhat papilionaceous,
   hermaphrodite; seeds often hairy; leaves small to medium-sized.

                                                           =Polygalaceæ=

   cc) Flowers actinomorphic (regular), unisexual or polygamous; seeds
   with a succulent coat; leaves large, palmately lobed.

                                                             =Caricaceæ=

  bb) Stamens the same number as the corolla lobes; corolla
  actinomorphic or nearly so:

   c) Leaves opposite:

    d) Carpels 2, more or less free; pollen granular, no corona in the
    corolla; mostly shrubs, trees or climbers.

                                                            =Apocynaceæ=

    dd) Carpels 2, free; styles separate up to the common thickened
    apex; pollen agglutinated into masses; corolla with a corona; mostly
    herbs or twiners.

                                                         =Asclepiadaceæ=

    ddd) Carpels 2, connate into a 1 or 2 celled ovary; pollen not
    agglutinated; one common style present:

     e) Stamens 5; ovules numerous; herbs; corolla actinomorphic.

                                                           =Gentianaceæ=

     ee) Stamens 4; ovules 1-2 in each cell; habit various; corolla
     usually zygomorphic.

                                                            =Verbenaceæ=

   cc) Leaves alternate or radical; marsh or aquatic herbs:

    d) Corolla lobes imbricate or contorted; styles 2, free or partly
    united.

                                                        =Hydrophyllaceæ=

    dd) Corolla lobes induplicate valvate; style 1, with 1-2 stigmas.

                                                           =Gentianaceæ=

  bbb) Stamens fewer than the corolla lobes, 4 or 2; corolla zygomorphic
  or rarely subactinomorphic:

   c) Leafless parasites (on roots) never green herbs; seeds minute,
   very numerous, with endosperm.

                                                          =Orobanchaceæ=

   cc) Leafy and not or rarely parasitic:

    d) Ovules numerous on each placenta; mostly trees; seeds transverse,
    winged.

                                                           =Bignoniaceæ=

    dd) Ovules 1-2 on each placenta; stem and branches often 4-sided.

                                                            =Verbenaceæ=


  =GROUP 6. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules on the
          walls of the ovary; ovary superior; petals absent.=


 a) Flowers arranged in a dense head surrounded by numerous imbricate
 bracts; stamens 4, opposite the calyx (or perianth) lobes, the latter
 valvate, one splitting away from the other three; leaves alternate,
 without stipules.

                                                             =Proteaceæ=

 aa) Flowers variously arranged but not in heads with an involucre of
 bracts; remainder of above characters not associated:

  b) Ovary composed of 1 carpel (_i.e._, with 1 placenta):

   c) Stamens numerous, free or very slightly connate at the base; pod
   stipitate.

                                                 =Papilionaceæ=(Cordyla)

   cc) Stamens 10 or fewer:

    d) Flowers hermaphrodite, not very small; leaves usually compound.

                                                         =Cæsalpiniaceæ=

    dd) Flowers unisexual or polygamous, usually very small; leaves
    usually simple:

     e) Ovule pendulous; anthers erect in bud; flowers solitary or
     cymose or fasciculate.

                                                               =Ulmaceæ=

     ee) Ovule pendulous or erect; anthers erect or inflexed in bud;
     flowers often on or within an enlarged and often fleshy receptacle
     or in catkins or heads.

                                                               =Moraceæ=

  bb) Ovary composed of more than 1 carpel; at least with 2 or more
  placentas:

   c) Ovary and fruit stipitate; seeds usually without endosperm and
   often with a curved embryo; sepals usually valvate.

                                                          =Capparidaceæ=

   cc) Ovary sessile:

    d) Inflorescence a catkin; flowers dioecious; seeds pilose with a
    basal tuft of hairs, without endosperm.

                                                             =Salicaceæ=

    dd) Inflorescence not a catkin but sometimes a slender pendulous
    spike or raceme; flowers usually hermaphrodite; seeds with
    endosperm.

     e) Flowers hypogynous; no staminodes between the stamens; filaments
     free.

                                                         =Flacourtiaceæ=

     ee) Flowers perigynous; staminodes often present and alternating
     with the fertile stamens; filaments free or connate.

                                                             =Samydaceæ=


  =GROUP 7. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules on the
   walls of the ovary; ovary inferior; petals present, free from each
                                other.=


 a) Flowers hermaphrodite; anthers straight or nearly so:

  b) Anthers opening by pores; leaves mostly opposite with parallel main
  nerves; stamens definite, often double the number of the petals.

                                                        =Melastomataceæ=

  bb) Anthers not opening by pores:

   c) Fleshy herbs or shrubs with reduced leaves and often epiphytic;
   stamens numerous; seeds without endosperm.

                                                              =Cactaceæ=

   cc) Tree or shrubs with well-developed green leaves; seeds with
   endosperm; stamens sometimes opposite the petals.

                                                             =Samydaceæ=

 aa) Flowers unisexual; stamens few, with twisted or conduplicate
 anthers; usually slender twiners with tendrils; leaves often scabrid.

                                                          =Cucurbitaceæ=


  =GROUP 8. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules on the
    walls of the ovary; ovary inferior; petals present, more or less
                                united.=


 Flowers unisexual; leaves alternate without longitudinally parallel
 nerves; tendrils often present; stamens mostly 3; anthers often twisted
 or conduplicate.

                                                          =Cucurbitaceæ=

 Flowers hermaphrodite; leaves opposite or verticillate often with
 longitudinally parallel nerves, without stipules; anthers mostly
 opening by terminal pores.

                                                        =Melastomataceæ=

 Flowers hermaphrodite, very rarely unisexual; leaves opposite or
 alternate, often stipulate; anthers not opening by pores, sometimes
 connivent at the apex; ovules numerous on the walls; petals united into
 a long tube; stipules persistent, inter- or intra-petiolar.

                                                    =Rubiaceæ=(Gardenia)


  =GROUP 9. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules on the
 walls of the ovary; ovary inferior; petals absent; leaves exstipulate;
            calyx unilateral or 3 lobed and often coloured.=

                                                       =Aristolochiaceæ=


 =GROUP 10. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules attached
  to the central axis or to the base or apex of the ovary cell; ovary
            superior; petals present, free from each other.=


 a) Perfect stamens the same number as the petals and opposite to them;
 leaves alternate or rarely opposite or all radical:

  b) Leaves not gland-dotted; petals and stamens more or less hypogynous
  or subperigynous; disk usually conspicuous:

   c) Calyx lobes or sepals imbricate, usually 2; stipules often
   scarious or setose; ovary 1-celled, with basal placenta.

                                                          =Portulacaceæ=

   cc) Calyx lobes valvate or open in bud:

    d) Disk absent from the flowers:

     e) Trees and shrubs; ovules usually 2 or more inserted on the inner
     angle of the cells; hairs on the leaves often stellate.

                                                          =Sterculiaceæ=

     ee) Herbs mostly with rosettes of leaves; flowers in corymbs; calyx
     tube scarious, ribbed; ovule 1, pendulous on a basal funicle.

                                                         =Plumbaginaceæ=

    dd) Disk present, perigynous; leaves mostly stipulate; ovary
    2-4-celled; ovules erect; seeds mostly with copious endosperm and
    large straight embryo.

                                                             =Rhamnaceæ=

    ddd) Disk present; leaves exstipulate:

     e) Ovules erect; ovary 1-3-celled; calyx conspicuous.

                                                              =Olacaceæ=

     ee) Ovules pendulous; ovary 1-celled; calyx minute.

                                                             =Opiliaceæ=

  bb) Leaves pellucid-punctate:

   c) Leaves simple, without stipules; ovules numerous on a free central
   placenta; no tendrils.

                                                            =Myrsinaceæ=

   cc) Leaves mostly compound, usually stipulate; inflorescence leaf-
   opposed; ovules 1-2 in each cell, inserted on the inner angle;
   tendrils often present.

                                                           =Ampelidaceæ=

 aa) Perfect stamens the same number as the petals and alternate with
 them or more numerous, very rarely fewer:

  b) Style basal; stipules mostly persistent; leaves simple; stamens
  numerous; stomata of the leaves usually with special subsidiary cells.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

  bb) Style or styles terminal or subterminal, sometimes gynobasic:

   c) Flowers markedly zygomorphic (irregular); lower sepal more or less
   elongated into a spur; sepals usually 3; anthers connivent around the
   ovary, opening lengthwise; seeds without endosperm.

                                                          =Balsaminaceæ=

   cc) Flowers actinomorphic or very slightly zygomorphic:

    d) Stamens united into more than one separate bundle (phalanges)
    often opposite the petals; leaves usually opposite, often gland-
    dotted or with resinous lines:

     e) Leaves opposite, exstipulate:

      f) Herbs or shrubs; styles free from the base or nearly so;
      flowers hermaphrodite; calyx imbricate.

                                                           =Hypericaceæ=

      ff) Trees or shrubs; styles mostly more or less united or stigma
      one and sessile or sub-sessile; flowers mostly unisexual; calyx
      imbricate.

                                                             =Guttiferæ=

     ee) Leaves alternate, stipulate; trees, shrubs or herbs; calyx
     valvate; hairs usually stellate:

      f) Stamens with some of the filaments sterile; fruits not hooked.

                                                          =Sterculiaceæ=

      ff) Stamens all fertile; fruits covered with hooks.

                                                              =Tiliaceæ=

    dd) Stamens free (at least not united into several bundles) or
    sometimes more or less united at the base or into one bundle
    (monadelphous):

     e) Leaves opposite or verticillate or rarely fasciculate, never all
     radical:

      f) Leaves compound, rarely unifoliolate and then with a distinctly
      tumid petiole, sometimes sessile:

       g) Leaves gland-dotted; disk usually present between the stamens
       and ovary; ovary often deeply lobed; cells 2-ovuled; pendulous;
       stipules rarely present.

                                                               =Rutaceæ=

       gg) Leaves not gland-dotted, sometimes fleshy; ovules pendulous
       from the central axis, 2 or more in each cell; disk often fleshy,
       rarely absent; stipules persistent and often paired; shrubs or
       herbs; leaves mostly 2-foliolate or pinnate; filaments often with
       a scale or gland attached to the base.

                                                         =Zygophyllaceæ=

      ff) Leaves simple but sometimes deeply and variously divided:

       g) Stamens more than twice as many as the petals; calyx valvate:

        h) Flowers hermaphrodite; anthers not inflexed in bud:

         i) Petals and stamens hypogynous; hairs often stellate;
         stipules in pairs.

                                                              =Tiliaceæ=

         ii) Petals and stamens perigynous; hairs not stellate; stipules
         interpetiolar.

                                                         =Rhizophoraceæ=

        hh) Flowers hermaphrodite; anthers inflexed in bud; petals and
        stamens perigynous.

                                                             =Lythraceæ=

        hhh) Flowers unisexual; anthers inflexed in bud; hairs stellate
        or lepidote.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

       gg) Stamens not more than twice as many as the petals:

        h) Trees, shrubs or woody climbers:

         i) Leaves stipulate, sometimes stipules rudimentary or of
         hairs:

          j) Disk absent or inconspicuous or of separate glands; calyx
          often glandular:

           k) Calyx mostly with a pair of glands outside; trees, shrubs
           or climbers; stamens mostly 10.

                                                          =Malpighiaceæ=

           kk) Calyx not glandular; anther-cells back to back; trees or
           shrubs; petals 4; stamens 4.

                                                          =Salvadoraceæ=

          jj) Disk present, conspicuous; calyx not glandular:

           k) Flowers hermaphrodite:

            l) Stamens inserted on or below the margin of the disk;
            filaments subulate:

             m) Stamens 3-5; sepals imbricate.

                                                           =Celastraceæ=

             mm) Stamens 8-10; sepals valvate.

                                                         =Rhizophoraceæ=

            ll) Stamens usually 3, inserted on the disk; filaments
            flattened or connivent, often adnate to the ovary; sepals
            imbricate.

                                                        =Hippocrateaceæ=

           kk) Flowers unisexual; ovules pendulous from the apex of the
           cell; seeds often carunculate.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

         ii) Leaves exstipulate or stipules gland-like:

          j) Anthers opening at the apex by a pore, often appendaged at
          the base; stamens as many or twice as many as the petals;
          leaves often with 3-9 longitudinally parallel nerves.

                                                        =Melastomataceæ=

          jj) Anthers opening by slits lengthwise; leaves usually with
          pinnate nerves:

           k) Ovules numerous in each cell; anthers inflexed in bud;
           calyx more or less tubular, with valvate lobes, often with
           accessory lobes.

                                                             =Lythraceæ=

           kk) Ovules few in each cell:

                                                          =Malpighiaceæ=

            l) Ovules pendulous from the apex of the cells; calyx fairly
            long and tubular, more or less petaloid; petals usually very
            small.

                                                           =Thymelæaceæ=

            ll) Ovules erect or ascending from the base of the cells;
            calyx imbricate:

             m) Filaments subulate or filiform; stamens usually 5.

                                                           =Celastraceæ=

             mm) Filaments flattened; stamens usually 3.

                                                        =Hippocrateaceæ=

        hh) Herbs, sometimes slightly woody at the base:

         i) Leaves stipulate; stipules paired; styles free from the
         base; ovules numerous, axile.

                                                            =Elatinaceæ=

         ii) Leaves exstipulate:

          j) Leaves with 3 or more longitudinally parallel nerves;
          anthers usually appendaged and opening by a terminal pore.

                                                        =Melastomataceæ=

          jj) Leaves not as above; anthers opening by longitudinal
          slits; stamens perigynous; anthers inflexed in bud.

                                                             =Lythraceæ=

     ee) Leaves alternate or all radical:

      f) Stamens more than twice the number of the sepals or petals:

       g) Sepals valvate or open in bud:

        h) Anthers 2-celled:

         i) Stamens free or slightly united only at the base:

          j) Calyx closed in bud:

           k) Flowers hermaphrodite; leaves simple; wood not resinous.

                                                              =Tiliaceæ=

           kk) Flowers unisexual; leaves entire or 3-lobed; petiole with
           2 glands at the apex.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

           kkk) Flowers usually polygamous; leaves mostly compound;
           petiole not glandular at the apex; wood resinous.

                                                          =Anacardiaceæ=

          jj) Calyx open in bud; leaves simple; stamens up to 20, free
          or nearly so.

                                                              =Olacaceæ=

         ii) Stamens more or less united into a tube or into bundles,
         hypogynous; indumentum usually stellate.

                                                          =Sterculiaceæ=

        hh) Anthers 1-celled, stamens more or less monadelphous; calyx
        with or without an epicalyx:

         i) Trees or rarely shrubs; leaves digitately compound; carpels
         not or very rarely splitting away from the central axis in
         fruit.

                                                            =Bombacaceæ=

         ii) Mostly herbs; leaves simple; carpels often splitting away
         from the central axis or becoming free in fruit.

                                                              =Malvaceæ=

       gg) Sepals imbricate or rarely completely connate or calyptrate:

        h) Petals and stamens perigynous; leaves stipulate:

         i) Seeds with endosperm and a curved embryo; mostly herbs;
         sepals 2.

                                                          =Portulacaceæ=

         ii) Seeds without endosperm; sepals more than 2.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

        hh) Petals and stamens more or less hypogynous or flowers
        unisexual; disk often present:

         i) Trees, shrubs or woody climbers:

          j) Leaves compound, pinnate or rarely unifoliolate and then
          with a tumid petiole:

           k) Ovule ascending:

            l) Leaves gland-dotted; style or styles central.

                                                               =Rutaceæ=

            ll) Leaves rarely gland-dotted; styles or stigmas often
            separated:

             m) Wood with resin ducts and leaves scented; style or
             stigma often eccentric.

                                                          =Anacardiaceæ=

             mm) Wood not resinous; leaves not or rarely scented; style
             or stigma central.

                                                            =Sapindaceæ=

           kk) Ovule or ovules pendulous; wood without resin ducts, bark
           bitter; leaves usually not gland-dotted.

                                                           =Simarubaceæ=

          jj) Leaves simple:

           k) Flowers unisexual; disk present.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

           kk) Flowers hermaphrodite:

            l) Torus enlarged after flowering; ovary mostly deeply
            lobed, the carpels becoming separated in fruit; anthers
            often opening by pores.

                                                              =Ochnaceæ=

            ll) Torus not enlarged; calyx enlarged and wing-like in
            fruit:

             m) Flowers mostly rather small and not showy; petals much
             contorted; ovary 2- or more-celled; leaves with
             comparatively few lateral nerves.

                                                       =Dipterocarpaceæ=

             mm) Flowers showy; ovary 1-celled with a basal placenta;
             leaves long, with very numerous parallel lateral nerves.

                                                              =Ochnaceæ=

         ii) Herbs; sepals 2; leaves fleshy, exstipulate; ovary 1-celled
         with numerous ovules; seeds strophiolate.

                                                          =Portulacaceæ=

      ff) Stamens definite in number in relation to the sepals or
      petals, often the same number or twice as many or fewer:

       g) Leaves compound, rarely unifoliolate and then with a
       distinctly tumid petiole:

        h) Stamens united into a tube; leaves pinnate or rarely
        unifoliolate, exstipulate; flowers actinomorphic; seeds often
        winged.

                                                              =Meliaceæ=

        hh) Stamens free or united only at the base:

         i) Leaves stipulate:

          j) Herbaceous or slightly woody; leaves digitately or
          pinnately compound.

                                                            =Oxalidaceæ=

          jj) Trees, shrubs or often climbers; leaves compound; stipules
          lateral; seeds without endosperm.

                                                            =Sapindaceæ=

         ii) Leaves exstipulate:

          j) Leaves gland-dotted:

                                                               =Rutaceæ=

          jj) Leaves not gland-dotted:

           k) Ovules pendulous:

            l) Leaflets 2; shrubs or trees with axillary or supra-
            axillary spines.

                                                           =Simarubaceæ=

            ll) Leaflets more than 2:

             m) Ovary of more than 1 carpel, 2 or more celled.

                                                            =Burseraceæ=

             mm) Ovary usually of 1 carpel.

                                                          =Anacardiaceæ=

           kk) Ovules ascending or horizontal:

            l) Ovules 2 in each cell, collateral; style simple; ovary of
            1 carpel.

                                                            =Connaraceæ=

            ll) Ovules 1 or more in each cell, erect or ascending; style
            simple or divided; ovary of more than 1 carpel.

                                                            =Sapindaceæ=

       gg) Leaves simple:

        h) Anthers opening by apical pores; ovary deeply lobed, torus
        enlarging in fruit and the carpels often becoming separate;
        ovules 1-2 in each cell.

                                                              =Ochnaceæ=

        hh) Anthers opening by slits lengthwise:

         i) Shrubs or trees:

          j) Leaves stipulate:

           k) Flowers unisexual:

            l) Petals entire:

             m) Stipules conspicuous, persistent.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

             mm) Stipules very inconspicuous, caducous.

                                                           =Celastraceæ=

            ll) Petals bilobed; stamens 5; disk composed of hypogynous
            glands opposite the petals.

                                                         =Chailletiaceæ=

           kk) Flowers hermaphrodite:

            l) Stipules axillary, convolute in bud, often very large;
            ovary entire, 2-celled; petals entire; ovule inserted in the
            middle of the placenta.

                                                 =Simarubaceæ=(Irvingia)

            ll) Stipules not axillary:

             m) Petals entire or emarginate; ovules erect; disk entire
             or lobed.

                                                           =Celastraceæ=

             mm) Petals often deeply lobed; ovules pendulous; disk of
             separate glands opposite the petals.

                                                         =Chailletiaceæ=

          jj) Leaves exstipulate:

           k) Stamens united into a tube; sepals not glandular; ovary 2-
           or more-celled.

                                                              =Meliaceæ=

           kk) Stamens free or connate only at the base:

            l) Stamens hypogynous or very slightly perigynous:

             m) Ovary 1-celled:

              n) Leaves fairly large; flowers in panicles, not supported
              on the enlarged torus.

                                                          =Anacardiaceæ=

              nn) Leaves very small and crowded; flowers in slender
              spikes or racemes.

                                                           =Tamaricaceæ=

             mm) Ovary 2- or more-celled; disk present; petals mostly
             valvate; ovary 3-5-celled.

                                                              =Olacaceæ=

            ll) Stamens distinctly perigynous; calyx tubular and often
            petaloid; petals mostly very small and scale-like.

                                                           =Thymelæaceæ=

         ii) Herbs:

          j) Flowers hermaphrodite; disk usually absent:

           k) Sepals valvate; bark fibrous; leaves often with thread-
           like tails at the base.

                                                              =Tiliaceæ=

           kk) Sepals imbricate; leaves not tailed at the base; ovary
           long-beaked.

                                                            =Geraniaceæ=

           kkk) Sepals imbricate; leaves not tailed; ovary not beaked.

            l) Petals not contorted:

                                                          =Molluginaceæ=

            ll) Petals contorted:

                                                               =Linaceæ=

          jj) Flowers unisexual; disk present or obscure.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=


 =GROUP 11. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules attached
  to the central axis or to the base or apex of the ovary cell; ovary
            superior; petals present, more or less united.=


 a) Stamens the same number as and opposite to the corolla lobes:

  b) Ovules solitary in the whole ovary or in each cell of the ovary;
  style often lobed:

   c) Trees or shrubs, often with hard wood:

    d) Petals imbricate; hairs often stellate or medifixed; staminodes
    often present, sometimes petaloid.

                                                             =Sapotaceæ=

    dd) Petals valvate; hairs usually simple; usually no staminodes:

     e) Inflorescence not leaf-opposed; leaves simple, without tendrils.

                                                              =Olacaceæ=

     ee) Inflorescence leaf-opposed; leaves often compound; mostly
     climbers with tendrils.

                                                           =Ampelidaceæ=

   cc) Herbs or climbers:

    d) Corolla lobes valvate; tendrils often present; inflorescence
    usually cymose-paniculate, leaf-opposed; leaves usually with the
    stipules adnate to the petiole; petals united at the base.

                                                           =Ampelidaceæ=

    dd) Corolla lobes imbricate; no tendrils; inflorescence more or less
    corymbose; petals united high up.

                                                         =Plumbaginaceæ=

  bb) Ovules 2 or more in each cell; style undivided; placentas basal:

   c) Trees or shrubs often with gland-dotted simple leaves; leaves
   exstipulate.

                                                            =Myrsinaceæ=

   cc) Herbs or climbers usually with compound stipulate leaves and
   leaf-opposed inflorescence.

                                                           =Ampelidaceæ=

   ccc) Herbs with opposite simple leaves and solitary or axillary
   scarlet, blue or rose flowers; leaves not gland-dotted, exstipulate.

                                                            =Primulaceæ=

 aa) Stamens the same number as the corolla-lobes and alternate with
 them, or more numerous or fewer:

  b) Stamens more than twice as many as the corolla lobes; flowers
  unisexual; corolla lobes about 5; leaves stipulate.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

  bb) Stamens as many as or up to twice as many as the corolla lobes or
  fewer:

   c) Stamens as many as or more numerous than the corolla lobes:

    d) Flowers zygomorphic (irregular):

     e) Petals united only at the base; seeds often pilose; ovules
     pendulous.

                                                           =Polygalaceæ=

     ee) Petals united high up into a tube:

      f) Ovules numerous in each cell; herbs; corolla lobes 5.

                                                             =Solanaceæ=

      ff) Ovules solitary in each complete or incomplete cell; habit
      various; corolla lobes 4.

                                                            =Verbenaceæ=

    dd) Flowers actinomorphic (regular):

     e) Leaves opposite or verticillate, mostly exstipulate:

      f) Anthers opening by apical pores or pore-like slits:

       g) Leaves in whorls; woody shrubs or undershrubs with usually
       very small leaves; stamens hypogynous.

                                                              =Ericaceæ=

       gg) Leaves paired; herbs; stamens epipetalous.

                                                           =Gentianaceæ=

      ff) Anthers opening by longitudinal slits:

       g) Style single with often a large more or less capitate stigma:

        h) Corona present in the flowers; mostly herbs or weak twiners,
        often with milky juice.

                                                         =Asclepiadaceæ=

        hh) Corona absent:

         i) Leaves exstipulate:

          j) Trees, shrubs or climbers often with milky juice; corolla
          lobes contorted-imbricate or rarely valvate.

                                                            =Apocynaceæ=

          jj) Herbs; corolla lobes imbricate; disk present.

                                                       =Scrophulariaceæ=

          jjj) Herbs with spicate flowers and radical leaves; corolla
          lobes imbricate; no disk.

                                                         =Plantaginaceæ=

         ii) Leaves stipulate or sheathing at the base.

                                                            =Loganiaceæ=

       gg) Styles with more than 1 separate stigma:

        h) Stamens double the number of the corolla lobes; flowers
        dioecious; endosperm copious, hard.

                                                              =Ebenaceæ=

        hh) Stamens the same number as the corolla lobes:

         i) Rudimentary stipules often present; stamens and corolla
         lobes 4.

                                                          =Salvadoraceæ=

         ii) Stipules absent:

          j) Style gynobasic:

                                                           =Boraginaceæ=

          jj) Style terminal:

           k) Trees or shrubs:

            l) Ovules numerous in each cell or, if solitary, then
            corolla lobes valvate.

                                                            =Loganiaceæ=

            ll) Ovules 1-2 in each cell; corolla lobes imbricate.

                                                            =Verbenaceæ=

           kk) Herbs or herbaceous climbers:

            l) Ovary imperfectly celled by the intrusive placentas.

                                                           =Gentianaceæ=

            ll) Ovary perfectly 2-celled with axile placentas; style
            simple.

                                                             =Solanaceæ=

     ee) Leaves alternate or all radical or reduced to scales:

      f) Leafless parasites destitute of chlorophyll; ovary 2-celled;
      ovules 2 in each cell.

                                                         =Convolvulaceæ=

      ff) Not parasitic or rarely so and then leafy:

       g) Leaves densely covered with viscid gland-tipped tentacles,
       mostly all radical; more or less stemless herbs.

                                                            =Droseraceæ=

       gg) Leaves without tentacles:

        h) Leaves stipulate:

         i) Flowers unisexual; petals not bifid.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

         ii) Flowers hermaphrodite; petals bifid.

                                                         =Chailletiaceæ=

        hh) Leaves without stipules:

         i) Stamens hypogynous or perigynous, free from the corolla or
         slightly adnate to its base:

          j) Anthers opening by terminal pores, often with appendages;
          woody plants.

                                                              =Ericaceæ=

          jj) Anthers opening by longitudinal slits:

           k) Stamens 4-6:

            l) Leaves gland-dotted; petals connivent by their claws;
            disk usually conspicuous.

                                                               =Rutaceæ=

            ll) Leaves not gland-dotted.

             m) Petals only slightly united at the base:

              n) Leaves pinnate or 1-3-foliolate.

                                                            =Connaraceæ=

              nn) Leaves simple:

               o) Stamens opposite the petals.

                                                              =Olacaceæ=

               oo) Stamens alternate with the petals.

                                                         =Pittosporaceæ=

             mm) Petals united high up, sometimes free at the base:

              n) Trees or shrubs.

                                                            =Burseraceæ=

              nn) Herbs.

                                                          =Campanulaceæ=

           kk) Stamens more than 6:

            l) Corolla tube fairly long; no disk; leaves not very small.

                                                              =Ebenaceæ=

            ll) Corolla tube very short; disk present; leaves very
            small.

                                                           =Tamaricaceæ=

         ii) Stamens inserted on or adnate to the corolla tube:

          j) Style gynobasic:

           k) Style 1; fruit composed of pyrenes or nutlets; corolla
           imbricate or contorted.

                                                           =Boraginaceæ=

           kk) Styles 2; fruit a capsule; corolla plicate.

                                                         =Convolvulaceæ=

          jj) Style not gynobasic, terminal:

           k) Corolla valvate or plaited in bud (in the latter case the
           limb may be somewhat twisted but not truly imbricate):

            l) Ovules 1-4 in each ovary cell; stamens inserted towards
            the base of the corolla tube.

                                                         =Convolvulaceæ=

            ll) Ovules numerous (rarely 3-6) in each ovary cell.

                                                             =Solanaceæ=

           kk) Corolla imbricate:

            l) Herbs with radical leaves and flowers in slender spikes.

                                                         =Plantaginaceæ=

            ll) Herbs, trees or shrubs; flowers not in slender spikes:

             m) Ovules 1 in each cell; trees and shrubs.

                                                           =Boraginaceæ=

             mm) Ovules numerous in each cell; herbs or small shrubs.

                                                             =Solanaceæ=

   cc) Stamens fewer than the corolla lobes; leaves mostly opposite:

    d) Flowers actinomorphic:

     e) Stamen 1; climbers or shrubs; seeds winged; one calyx lobe much
     larger than the others and petaloid.

                                                            =Loganiaceæ=

     ee) Stamens more than 1:

      f) Stamens 6-8 opposite the inner lobes of the corolla; ovules
      solitary in each cell; trees or shrubs.

                                                             =Sapotaceæ=

      ff) Stamens alternate with the corolla lobes:

       g) Peduncle of the inflorescence adnate to the petiole; corolla
       lobes or some of them 2-cleft.

                                                         =Chailletiaceæ=

       gg) Peduncle not adnate to the petiole; corolla lobes not cleft
       or only slightly so:

        h) Ovules few (1-4) in each cell of the ovary:

         i) Disk none; stamens 2; shrubs, trees or climbers; leaves
         simple or pinnate.

                                                              =Olacaceæ=

         ii) Disk present; stamens usually 4; shrubs or trees; leaves
         simple or digitate.

                                                            =Verbenaceæ=

        hh) Ovules numerous:

         i) Corolla lobes minute, valvate, alternating with entire or
         2-lobed appendages.

                                                             =Solanaceæ=

         ii) Corolla lobes imbricate, without appendages.

                                                       =Scrophulariaceæ=

    dd) Flowers zygomorphic:

     e) Aquatic herbs with bladder-like leaves; stamens 2; anthers
     1-celled; sepals 2; ovules on a free basal placenta.

                                                       =Lentibulariaceæ=

     ee) Characters not as above:

      f) Ovary not deeply lobed; style not gynobasic:

       g) Ovules numerous in the whole ovary or in each cell of the
       ovary, or if 2 then superposed:

        h) Leaves pinnately compound; ovules numerous; seeds often
        winged, without endosperm; shrubs or trees.

                                                           =Bignoniaceæ=

        hh) Leaves simple; mostly herbaceous:

         i) Ovules numerous; ovary 2-celled; seeds usually minute.

                                                       =Scrophulariaceæ=

         ii) Ovules 1 to many; ovary 2-4 celled; seeds not on hook-like
         funicles.

                                                            =Pedaliaceæ=

         iii) Ovules few; ovary 2-celled; leaves rarely all radical;
         seeds on hook-like funicles.

                                                            =Acanthaceæ=

       gg) Ovule solitary in each cell of the ovary or if 2 then
       collateral; herbs, shrubs or trees.

                                                            =Verbenaceæ=

      ff) Ovary deeply 4-lobed; style gynobasic; leaves opposite or
      verticillate; flowers often in whorls; stems usually quadrangular.

                                                               =Labiatæ=


 =GROUP 12. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules attached
  to the central axis or to the base or apex of the ovary cell; ovary
                       superior; petals absent.=


 a) Calyx absent from the hermaphrodite and often from the female
 flowers:

  b) Moss-like or hepaticiform aquatic herbs with minute flowers; ovules
  2 or more in a 1-celled ovary.

                                                        =Podostemonaceæ=

  bb) Above characters not associated:

   c) Flowers surrounded by an involucre margined by fleshy glands; male
   flowers several to numerous and each consisting of a single stamen,
   with a single female flower often stalked in their midst.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

   cc) Flowers not as above:

    d) Leaves stipulate, stipules sometimes adnate to the petiole:

     e) Herbs or shrubs; flowers in dense spikes; petioles not dilated
     and not enclosing the young bud.

                                                             =Piperaceæ=

     ee) Trees or shrubs; flowers on a common open receptacle, the fruit
     becoming immersed in it.

                                                               =Moraceæ=

    dd) Leaves without stipules; herbs sometimes slightly woody at the
    base; ovary 1-celled.

                                                             =Urticaceæ=

 aa) Calyx always present:

  b) Moss-like or hepaticiform aquatic herbs with minute flowers; ovules
  2 or more in a 1-celled ovary.

                                                        =Podostemonaceæ=

  bb) Above characters not associated:

   c) Leaves opposite or verticillate, never all radical:

    d) Leaves stipulate:

     e) Flowers hermaphrodite:

      f) Herbs, sometimes slightly woody at the base; leaves mostly
      pinnate.

                                                         =Zygophyllaceæ=

      ff) Herbs with simple leaves.

                                                          =Illecebraceæ=

      fff) Trees or shrubs with reduced flowers; leaves simple.

                                                               =Ulmaceæ=

     ee) Flowers unisexual:

      f) Ovary 2- or more-celled, often deeply lobed; seeds usually with
      a distinct caruncle.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

      ff) Ovary 1-celled; ovary usually not lobed:

       g) Ovule erect:

        h) Filaments inflexed; mostly herbaceous with fibrous stems;
        juice not milky.

                                                             =Urticaceæ=

        hh) Filaments not inflexed; mostly trees and shrubs, rarely
        herbs; juice mostly milky, the flowers often minute and arranged
        on or inside an enlarged receptacle.

                                                               =Moraceæ=

       gg) Ovule pendulous:

        h) Not aquatic:

         i) Filaments not inflexed in bud:

          j) Fruit a drupe; flowers monœcious or subdiœcious.

                                                               =Ulmaceæ=

          jj) Fruit a small dry achene; flowers diœcious.

                                                          =Cannabinaceæ=

         ii) Filaments erect or inflexed in bud.

                                                               =Moraceæ=

        hh) Aquatic herb with verticillate divided leaves.

                                                       =Ceratophyllaceæ=

    dd) Leaves exstipulate:

     e) Flowers unisexual; ovary usually 2- or more celled; seeds
     usually with a distinct caruncle.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

     ee) Flowers hermaphrodite; ovary 1-celled:

      f) Stamens involute in bud; calyx more or less herbaceous, often
      long and tubular, mostly covered with sticky glands.

                                                          =Nyctaginaceæ=

      ff) Stamens erect in bud:

       g) Sepals free or nearly so, calyx more or less dry and scarious:

                                                           =Amarantaceæ=

       gg) Sepals more or less united, herbaceous.

                                                            =Ficoidaceæ=

   cc) Leaves alternate or radical or reduced to scales:

    d) Leaves stipulate:

     e) Stamens monadelphous, usually numerous; calyx valvate:

      f) Flowers usually hermaphrodite; hairs usually stellate.

                                                          =Sterculiaceæ=

      ff) Flowers always unisexual; hairs often simple.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

     ee) Stamens free or shortly connate only at the base:

      f) Stamens the same number as the sepals and alternate with them.

                                                             =Rhamnaceæ=

      ff) Stamens the same number as the sepals and opposite to them, or
      more numerous or fewer:

       g) Stipules ochreate, _i.e._, sheathing and more or less
       membranous around the stem; fruit a small nut.

                                                           =Polygonaceæ=

       gg) Stipules not ochreate:

        h) Flowers hermaphrodite; stipules sheathing, sometimes adnate
        to the petiole:

         i) Leaves digitately lobed; stems herbaceous creeping.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

         ii) Leaves not digitate; erect or diffuse herbs.

                                                          =Molluginaceæ=

        hh) Flowers unisexual; stems not creeping:

         i) Ovary 3-celled, composed of 3 carpels; fruit a capsule.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

         ii) Ovary 1-celled, composed of 1 carpel, fruit not a capsule.

                                                               =Moraceæ=

    dd) Leaves exstipulate:

     e) Leaves ternately compound; herbs; ovary composed of 1 carpel,
     long-stipitate in fruit; flowers paniculate or racemose, very
     small.

                                                          =Ranunculaceæ=

     ee) Leaves compound; trees and shrubs:

      f) Cultivated trees with milky latex; fruit a capsule, with
      pendulous seeds; flowers unisexual; leaves digitate.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

      ff) Indigenous trees or shrub; latex not milky; leaves pinnate.

                                                            =Sapindaceæ=

     eee) Leaves simple:

      f) Stamens circinnately involute in bud; calyx tube often rather
      long; ovary 1-celled; ovule 1, basal.

                                                          =Nyctaginaceæ=

      ff) Stamens sometimes inflexed but not circinnate in bud:

       g) Stamens more or less connate into a central column; ovule
       erect; seeds with ruminate endosperm.

                                                          =Myristicaceæ=

       gg) Stamens free or the filaments shortly connate only at the
       base:

        h) Stamens distinctly perigynous; sepals connate into a tube
        below:

         i) Twiners; flowers in axillary spikes, racemes or panicles;
         ovule solitary, basal.

                                                            =Basellaceæ=

         ii) Herbs; stamens numerous; flowers solitary or clustered in
         the axils of the leaves.

                                                            =Ficoidaceæ=

         iii) Trees or shrubs; calyx mostly long and petaloid; leaves
         frequently small and evergreen; stamens definite; anthers
         opening by slits.

                                                           =Thymelæaceæ=

        hh) Stamens hypogynous or slightly perigynous if accompanied by
        a disk:

         i) Flowers arranged in an involucre (cyathium) margined by
         glands; male flower reduced to a single stamen, the female to a
         single stipitate ovary.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

         ii) Flowers not as above; stamens more than 1:

          j) Trees or shrubs:

           k) Flowers unisexual; ovules solitary, pendulous; seed with
           straight embryo.

                                                          =Euphorbiaceæ=

           kk) Flowers unisexual or polygamous; ovules 2 in each cell,
           collateral or the lower ascending; embryo spirally twisted.

                                                            =Sapindaceæ=

          jj) Herbs:

           k) Calyx scarious; flowers often in spikes or heads; ovule 1
           in a 1-celled ovary.

                                                           =Amarantaceæ=

           kk) Calyx herbaceous; flowers more or less paniculate; ovule
           1 in a 1-celled ovary.

                                                         =Chenopodiaceæ=


 =GROUP 13. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules attached
  to the central axis or to the base or apex of the ovary cell; ovary
            inferior; petals present, free from each other.=


 a) Leaves opposite or verticillate; never all radical; rarely reduced
 to scales:

  b) Leaves stipulate:

   c) Stamens opposite the petals and the same number.

                                                             =Rhamnaceæ=

   cc) Stamens alternate with the petals or more numerous:

    d) Ovary composed of 2-6 carpels; 2-6 celled; flowers rarely
    congested; ovules pendulous; mostly maritime trees or shrubs.

                                                         =Rhizophoraceæ=

    dd) Ovary various; flowers rarely in heads; ovules ascending or
    attached to the central axis; trees, shrubs or herbs.

                                                               =Rosaceæ=

  bb) Leaves exstipulate:

   c) Trees, shrubs or climbers:

    d) Stamens numerous; leaves gland-dotted; style simple with a small
    capitate stigma or rarely 3-4 lobed.

                                                              =Myrtaceæ=

    dd) Stamens as many to twice as many as the petals:

     e) Stamens the same number and opposite the petals; mostly
     parasitic shrubs or trees; calyx usually much reduced.

                                                           =Loranthaceæ=

     ee) Stamens the same number and alternate with the petals or more
     numerous:

      f) Anthers opening by a terminal pore; filaments often jointed;
      leaves often with 3-9 longitudinally parallel nerves.

                                                        =Melastomataceæ=

      ff) Anthers opening by longitudinal slits; calyx mostly valvate;
      ovules 2 or more; fruits mostly winged; endosperm absent; flowers
      in heads, spikes, racemes or panicles.

                                                           =Combretaceæ=

   cc) Herbs:

    d) Anthers opening by a terminal pore; leaves mostly with
    longitudinally parallel nerves; filaments often jointed.

                                                        =Melastomataceæ=

    dd) Anthers opening by longitudinal slits:

     e) Ovules numerous on placentas pendulous from the apex of the
     1-celled ovary.

                                                          =Saxifragaceæ=

     ee) Ovules 1-4, pendulous from the top of the ovary cells.

                                                         =Halorrhagaceæ=

 aa) Leaves alternate or all radical:

  b) Flowers unisexual:

   c) Flowers mostly zygomorphic; stamens mostly indefinite in number;
   no tendrils; stipules paired.

                                                            =Begoniaceæ=

   cc) Flowers actinomorphic; stamens definite or rarely many, usually
   3; anthers often curved or twisted; tendrils present or absent; no
   stipules.

                                                          =Cucurbitaceæ=

  bb) Flowers hermaphrodite:

   c) Leaves stipulate:

    d) Herbs; leaves usually compound or much dissected, sometimes
    peltate; sepals very small; fruit composed of 2 indehiscent
    mericarps.

                                                           =Umbelliferæ=

    dd) Trees or shrubs:

     e) Stamens the same number and opposite the petals; leaves entire
     or toothed.

                                                             =Rhamnaceæ=

     ee) Stamens alternate with the petals or more numerous or fewer;
     flowers mostly in umbels; leaves compound, rarely simple; fruit a
     berry or drupe.

                                                             =Araliaceæ=

   cc) Leaves exstipulate:

    d) Stamens as many as and opposite to the petals; often parasitic on
    other trees and shrubs; corolla usually brightly coloured.

                                                           =Loranthaceæ=

    dd) Stamens alternate with the petals or more numerous; not
    parasitic:

     e) Herbs:

      f) Ovules more than 1 in each ovary cell; ovary mostly 4-celled.

                                                             =Onagraceæ=

      ff) Ovules 4 in a 1-celled ovary; flowers monœcious or polygamous,
      not umbellate.

                                                         =Halorrhagaceæ=

      fff) Ovules solitary in each cell; usually pendulous; flowers
      umbellate; carpels separating in fruit into 2 indehiscent
      mericarps.

                                                           =Umbelliferæ=

     ee) Shrubs or trees:

      f) Petals entire or at most toothed; ovary 1-celled.

                                                           =Combretaceæ=

      ff) Petals entire, 2-lobed or laciniate, often involute; ovary
      4-celled.

                                                         =Rhizophoraceæ=


=GROUP 14. One carpel or more than one united carpel; ovules attached to
    the central axis or to the base or apex of the ovary cell; ovary
            inferior; petals present, more or less united.=


 a) Leave opposite:

  b) Leaves stipulate, entire, stipules mostly inter- or intrapetiolar;
  anthers free from each other; corolla always actinomorphic.

                                                              =Rubiaceæ=

  bb) Leaves exstipulate:

   c) Anthers free from each other; ovules mostly pendulous:

    d) Leaves not gland-dotted; stamens definite; shrubs, mostly
    parasitic on trees; flowers usually not in heads and not surrounded
    by bracts.

                                                           =Loranthaceæ=

    dd) Leaves gland-dotted; stamens mostly numerous; trees or shrubs;
    flowers cymose or fasciculate.

                                                              =Myrtaceæ=

   cc) Anthers mostly connivent or in pairs around the style:

    d) Ovule solitary erect; flowers mostly in heads surrounded by an
    involucre of bracts.

                                                             =Compositæ=

    dd) Ovules numerous; flowers usually not in heads and not surrounded
    by bracts.

                                                          =Campanulaceæ=

 aa) Leaves alternate or radical:

  b) Anthers free from one another:

   c) Stamens the same number and opposite the corolla lobes:

    d) Herbaceous, leaves not gland-dotted.

                                                            =Primulaceæ=

    dd) Trees and shrubs:

     e) Not parasitic; leaves often gland-dotted; corolla short.

                                                            =Myrsinaceæ=

     ee) Often parasitic; leaves not gland-dotted; corolla often long.

                                                           =Loranthaceæ=

   cc) Stamens alternate with the corolla lobes or more numerous or
   fewer:

    d) Flowers hermaphrodite; stems not climbing; anthers straight.

                                                          =Campanulaceæ=

    dd) Flowers unisexual; stems often climbing by tendrils; anthers
    often sinuous or twisted.

                                                          =Cucurbitaceæ=

  bb) Anthers united into a ring around the style or flowers unisexual:

   c) Flowers not in heads surrounded by a common involucre.

                                                            =Lobeliaceæ=

   cc) Flowers in heads surrounded by a common involucre.

                                                             =Compositæ=


 =GROUP 15. One carpel or more than one united carpels; ovules attached
  to the central axis or to the base or apex of the ovary cell; ovary
                       inferior; petals absent.=


 a) Parasitic herbs destitute of chlorophyll, the leaves reduced to
 scales; ovules nude or with a single integument:

  b) Flowers densely crowded; fruits nut-like, 1-seeded; ovule solitary,
  pendulous.

                                                        =Balanophoraceæ=

  bb) Flowers solitary, large; ovules numerous.

                                                            =Hydnoraceæ=

 aa) Not parasitic or if so then more or less woody and often with
 normally developed leaves:

  b) Leaves stipulate:

   c) Flowers unisexual, stamens and ovules few, the latter solitary;
   trees or shrubs.

                                                               =Moraceæ=

   cc) Flowers hermaphrodite; stamens the same number and alternate with
   the sepals.

                                                             =Rhamnaceæ=

  bb) Leaves exstipulate:

   c) Ovules pendulous from the apex of the ovary or from the apex of a
   basal placenta:

    d) Not parasitic; stamens inflexed in bud, often double the number
    of the sepals; fruits often winged.

                                                           =Combretaceæ=

    dd) Mostly parasitic; flowers small and leaves often reduced;
    stamens erect in bud, the same number and opposite the sepals; fruit
    not winged.

                                                            =Santalaceæ=

   cc) Ovule 1, erect; mostly parasitic; flowers often brightly
   coloured.

                                                           =Loranthaceæ=

ARTIFICIAL KEY TO THE FAMILIES OF MONOCOTYLEDONES REPRESENTED IN THIS
FLORA.

 a) Flowers very small, arranged on a spadix, more or less enclosed by a
 green or coloured spathe; erect, creeping or climbing herbs; rootstock
 often tuberous or thick and fleshy.

                                                                =Araceæ=

 aa) Flowers not arranged as above:

  b) Small or minute floating plants not differentiated into stem and
  leaves and with much reduced flowers consisting of 1-2 stamens and a
  sessile ovary either naked or enclosed in a membranous perianth,
  anthers 1-2 celled; ovary 1-celled; ovule 1 or more on a basal
  placenta.

                                                              =Lemnaceæ=

  bb) Characters not as above; if aquatic plants then usually with well-
  developed leaves:

   c) Ovary apocarpous, of more than 1 carpel:

    d) Submerged aquatic plants:

     e) Perianth-segments 1-3, white or coloured.

                                                        =Aponogetonaceæ=

     ee) Perianth-segments 4 and herbaceous, or absent.

                                                       =Potamogetonaceæ=

    dd) Not aquatic or if so then not submerged:

     e) Carpels indehiscent; ovules 1 to few, basal or on the inner
     angle of the carpel; marsh or aquatic herbs.

                                                           =Alismataceæ=

     ee) Carpels dehiscent; ovules numerous on reticulately branched
     parietal placentas; scapigerous marsh herbs with milky juice;
     stamens usually 9.

                                                             =Butomaceæ=

     eee) Carpels or fruit indehiscent, trees or shrubs with simple
     stems and usually large, often palmate leaves.

                                                       =Palmaceæ= (part)

   cc) Ovary syncarpous or carpel solitary:

    d) Ovary superior:

     e) Flowers in the axils of membranous or more or less dry bracts
     (glumes) arranged in spikelets mostly arranged in spikes, racemes,
     panicles or heads; carpel solitary; perianth of small scales or
     bristles or absent:

      f) Stems usually triangular, solid and without nodes; leaf-sheaths
      mostly closed all round the stem and usually without a ligule;
      filament often attached to the base of the anther; ovule basal;
      seed free from the pericarp.

                                                             =Cyperaceæ=

      ff) Stems mostly cylindrical and hollow between the nodes; leaf-
      sheaths nearly always split down one side and often terminating in
      a distinct ligule; filament usually attached to the back of the
      anther; ovule attached laterally; seed more or less adnate to the
      pericarp.

                                                              =Gramineæ=

     ee) Flowers usually with a distinct perianth or at any rate not in
     spikelets, etc., as above; ovary usually composed of more than 1
     carpel:

      f) Flowers mostly hermaphrodite or if unisexual then not collected
      into involucrate heads or dense spikes:

       g) Ovules on parietal placentas; fertile stamens 3: all the
       perianth-segments petaloid; aquatic herbs; stamens 3 or 1.

                                                  =Pontederiaceæ= (part)

       gg) Ovules on axile or basal placentas; fertile stamens usually
       6:

        h) Perianth present:

         i) Perianth-segments 2-seriate, the outer herbaceous, the inner
         petaloid; leaf-bases sheathing.

                                                          =Commelinaceæ=

         ii) Perianth-segments all more or less petaloid:

          j) Aquatic floating herbs with long petioles sheathing at the
          base; 3 upper stamens included, 3 lower ones more or less
          exserted.

                                                         =Pontederiaceæ=

          jj) Not aquatic or rarely subaquatic; stamens 6, more or less
          equal;

                                                              =Liliaceæ=

        hh) Perianth absent or very rudimentary; carpel 1; submerged
        aquatics with branched filiform smooth or muricate stems,
        flowers diœcious or monœcious, axillary, small.

                                                             =Naiadaceæ=

      ff) Flowers unisexual, collected into involucrate heads or dense
      spikes:

       g) Flowers in dense involucrate heads; low herbs often stemless
       with mostly densely crowded leaves.

                                                          =Eriocaulaceæ=

       gg) Flowers in spadices; trees or shrubs, the stems bearing thick
       aerial roots.

                                                            =Pandanaceæ=

       ggg) Flowers in dense cylindric spikes; aquatic herbs with linear
       alternate leaves and creeping rhizomes.

                                                              =Typhaceæ=

    dd) Ovary inferior:

     e) Stamens 3-6:

      f) Ovules parietal:

       g) Leaves not divided; stigma not umbrella-shaped, flowers
       hermaphrodite or unisexual.

                                                       =Hydrocharitaceæ=

       gg) Leaves divided; stigma umbrella-shaped; leaves large,
       divided.

                                                              =Taccaceæ=

      ff) Ovules axile, basal or apical:

       g) Perianth-lobes or segments 3-6:

        h) Stamens 6 or 3; flowers very small, diœcious; stems climbing.

                                                          =Dioscoreaceæ=

        hh) Stamens 6; flowers conspicuous, hermaphrodite; stems not
        climbing.

                                                         =Amaryllidaceæ=

        hhh) Stamens 3; inserted opposite the outer perianth-segments;
        not climbing.

                                                              =Iridaceæ=

       gg) Perianth-segment 1; stamens 5, rarely 6; leaves with pinnate
       nervation; tall plants.

                                                               =Musaceæ=

     ee) Stamen 1:

      f) Flowers actinomorphic or nearly so:

       g) Anthers 2-celled; ovules numerous; perianth-segments united
       below.

                                                          =Zingiberaceæ=

       gg) Anthers 1-celled; ovules solitary in each cell; petiole
       thickened towards the apex.

                                                            =Marantaceæ=

      ff) Flowers very zygomorphic; ovules numerous; andrœcium united
      with the gynæcium into a column; anther sessile or subsessile on
      the column.

                                                            =Orchidaceæ=




                             =GYMNOSPERMÆ=


                              =CYCADACEÆ.=


1 =Encephalartos septentrionalis= _Schwfth._ MURIEPAI—Zande; KOTTO—Krej
& Indogo.

Palm-like undershrub; stem fusiform or globose; up to 2 ft. high. Leaves
up to 5 ft. long, pinnate, pinnules up to 50 pairs, ovate-lanceolate,
falcate, 4-5 in. long, with 3-8 teeth in basal half, densely tomentose
on young fronds.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Golo; Deim Zubeir; Niamniam-land: Mambeli, Gumango
Hill near the Rye, on the Ibba (Tonj) River, east of the upper Hoo;
Bongo; Lessi River).

A kind of beer is made from the central portion of the stem.


                              =GNETACEÆ.=


2 =Ephedra Alte= _C. A. Mey._

Diœcious shrub, climbing or erect; branches more or less whorled on
upper nodes. Leaves scale-like in whorls of 2-3, connate at base. Male
spikes axillary, solitary or in dense glomerules. Fem. spikes solitary
or fascicled.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


                             =ANGIOSPERMÆ=


                            =DICOTYLEDONES=


                              =ANONACEÆ.=


3 =Uvaria bukobensis= _Eng._

Small tree. Leaves oblong-elliptic, obtusely acuminate, up to 6 in.
long, nearly glabrous. Flowers usually in pairs above the axils. Sepals
and petals warted and shortly tomentose.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=U. Schweinfurthii= _Eng._ & _Diels._

Leaves oblong cordate at the base, subacutely acuminate, 3-4 in. long,
with long weak hairs on the midrib. Flowers yellow, small. Petals ¾ in.
long. Fruiting carpels oblong with 3 or 4 transverse constrictions,
rusty-hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ibba River near Nganye: Niamniam-land).


=U. near U. Schweinfurthii= _Eng._ & _Diels._ (small leaves).

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, rounded at the base, acute, 2-2½ in. long, ¾-1
in. broad, covered below with soft stellate hairs. Flowers very small;
buds ovoid. Fruiting carpels oblong, with about 5 transverse
constrictions, rusty-tomentose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Kuddu).


=U. verrucosa= _Eng._ & _Diels._

Branchlets scurfy. Leaves oblong-elliptic, subcordate, 6 in. long, with
numerous lateral nerves, closely stellate-tomentellous below; flowers
not known. Fruiting carpels long stalked, warted.

Congo Border by the Kambele.


4 =Meiocarpidium lepidotum= _Eng._ & _Diels._ WINGA—Jur.

Small to middle-sized tree. Leaves oblong, long-acuminate, up to 8 in.
long, densely scaly below. Flowers covered with scales. Fruiting carpels
terete.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Tonj).


5 =Hexalobus monopetalus= _Eng._ & _Diels._ M’BANDA—Golo.

Tree; fruit said to be edible. Leaves oblong, up to 5 in. long. Flowers
cream-coloured, sessile; 1-3 together, axillary; carpels 4-6.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Jur Ghattas and Kutshuk Ali, Mittu-land:
Mvolo, near Biri River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi & Bari countries).


=H. grandiflorus= _Benth._ BEJUGOLO & PORO—Golo.

Middle-sized tree, with handsome pendant cream-coloured petals. Leaves
narrowly oval or oblanceolate, glabrous, carpels 10-12; ovary pilose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Niamniam-land, Mittu-land & Dar
Fertit).

White wood used for carpentry.


6 =Popowia djurensis= _Eng._ & _Diels._

Scandent shrub. Leaves small, up to 2 in. long, obtuse, oblong. Flowers
in shortly stalked axillary clusters.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Bongo-land & near Biri River).


=P. Schweinfurthii= _Eng._ & _Diels._

Scandent shrub. Leaves up to 6 in. long, sub-acuminate. Flowers very
small, axillary, in pairs on slender pedicels.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Mbrwole River).


7 =Xylopia near oxypetala= _Eng._ & _Diels._

Leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtusely acuminate, 2-4 in. long, 1 in. broad,
finely pubescent below. Flowers axillary, subsessile. Fruits tomentose,
glabrous, whitish.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River); Belgian
Congo (Niamniam-land: Mbrwole River).


=X. Vallotii= _Chipp._ CHUWEI (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

A middle-sized, straight tree. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, 2-2½ in. long,
1 in. broad, rounded at base. Fruiting carpels up to about 1 in. long.

Nuba Mountains Prov. (J. Eliri).


8 =Anona senegalensis= _Pers._ KATEING (J. Eliri)—Nuba; APINROT—Dinka;
AMBALU—Jur; BAFI, DU, NDU & NU—Golo; BOGORA—Zande.

Small tree; fruit up to size of a small orange, edible, nearly smooth.
Flowers solitary, pedunculate. Leaves oblong-elliptical to broadly
elliptical, pubescent above. Petals 6.

Upper Nile Prov.; Nuba Mountains Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau,
Niamniam & Jur-land).

The fruit is edible; the boiled leaves are used as a perfume by Golo
women. In Western Africa the whole plant is used in native medicine.


=A. reticulata= _Linn._ Bullock’s heart—Introduced.

Small tree. Leaves narrow oval-oblong. Flowers 2-4 together; petals 3.
Fruit cordate or ovoid, faintly marked.

Khartoum Prov. (Khartoum North: Shambat).


=A. squamosa= _Linn._ Custard Apple—GISHTA—Arab; Introduced.

Shrub or small tree. Fruit ab. 2-3 in. across, green, marked with
somewhat rhomboidal adnate scales; pulp white, seeds black. Petals 3.

Grown in gardens in many parts of the country.


=A. Cherimolla= _Mill._ Cherimoyer. Introduced.

Shrub. Leaves acute to nearly obtuse. Flowers solitary or in pairs;
petals 3. Fruit sub-ovoid-cordate with obtusely tubercled areoles.

Khartoum Prov. (Khartoum North: Shambat).

The best of the Anonas.


9 =Monodora sp. nov.=

A fine foliage tree 20 ft. Leaves oblong-elliptic, obtuse, cordate at
the base, 10-12 in. long, with numerous lateral nerves; flowers not
known, but probably handsome and mottled.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


                            =RANUNCULACEÆ.=


10 =Clematis inciso-dentata= _Hochst._ SHADDEIP—Hadendowa.

Woody climber. Leaves variable, pinnately or ternately divided. Flowers
in terminal or axillary panicles. Sepals petaloid, white, hairy inside;
petals 0. Fruiting head of silky white achenes.

Red Sea Province (Erkowit); Nuba Mountains Prov. (Khor Abu Habl,
Dilling).


=C. glaucescens= _Fresen._

Weak woody climber. Leaves ternately divided, softly hairy below.
Flowers in short terminal and axillary panicles. Sepals very silky.
Fruiting heads with silky achenes shortly tailed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Doguddu & Sabbi). Darfur Prov.
(Kulme).


=C. cf. C. glaucescens= _Fresen._

As above, but much longer tails to the achenes.


=C. simensis= _Fresen._

Woody climber. Leaves pinnatisect; leaflets 1-5, ovate to ovate-
lanceolate, crenate-serrate. Panicles many flowered. Flowers white, ¾
in. diam.; sepals short silky within. Carpels hairy; tails 1 in. or
more.

White Nile Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme & Jebel Marra; up to 9,500 ft.).


=C. grata= _Wall._

Climber. Leaves pinnatisect; leaflets 3-7, ovate, rounded or cordate at
base, broadly crenate, silky or pubescent beneath. Flowers ¾ in. in
diam.; sepals nearly glabrous inside.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


11 =Clematopsis Oliveri= _Hutchinson._

Erect semi-woody plant. Upper leaves usually 3-fol., lower often 1-fol.;
leaflets obovate to linear-oblong. Flowers white, solitary; petals 0.
Achenes silky with long plumose tails.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


12 =Ranunculus pubescens= _Thunb._

Herb. Stems erect 1-2 ft. high. Lowest pinnæ usually petiolulate, lobes
3-fid or 3-partite; uppermost leaves sessile, 3-fid or rarely entire.
Petals 5, yellow.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, 6,000 to 9,000 ft. Kulme).


13 =Nigella sativa= _Linn._

Erect herb. Sepals petaloid, blue; carpels connected together in the
middle, diverging above into 5 points.

Darfur Prov. (Melit & Jebel Marra, 6,500 ft.).


                           =CERATOPHYLLACEÆ.=


14 =Ceratophyllum demersum= _Linn._

Sea-weed-like aquatic herb with verticils of 2-fid or dichotomously
divided and toothed leaves. Flowers axillary, monœcious, minute.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (several places); Sobat River; Bahr El
Jebel (Mouth); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (above the mouth of the Jur River,
etc.).


=C. spp.=

White Nile Prov.; Sobat River; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel.


                      =NYMPHÆACEÆ (Water lilies).=


15 =Nymphæa micrantha= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Aquatic herb with broadly ovate sagittate leaves and hairy bulbil at the
apex of the petiole. Flowers about 2½ in. long. Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Bongo-land: Kulongo).


=N. nubica= _Lehm._

Aquatic herb with large almost orbicular peltate leaves with undulate
margins. Flowers about 4 in. long.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=N. cærulea= _Savign._ SUTEIB—Arab; TWAL—Nuer.

Aquatic herb. Leaves ovate-orbicular, very deeply cordate at the base,
glabrous, about 5 in. long. Flowers 2½ in. long, bluish. Sepals
lanceolate, subacute, lined with red.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: between Reggo & Kiro).

=var. Schweinfurthiana= _Gilg_ & _Muschl._

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek, near Nuer villages).

=var. Rehneltiana= _Gilg_ & _Muschl._

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Jur Ghattas & Aggadi, & Bongo-land; Balu
Stream near Sabbi, Shambé); Upper White Nile Prov. (Tonga); Darfur Prov.
(Zalingei); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=N. cf. N. cærulea= _Sav._

As preceding, but leaves more widely cordate and with undulate margins
and inconspicuous nerves.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=N. Lotus= _Linn._ SUTEIB—Arab; RUNGAIME—Zande.

Leaves shortly peltate and deeply cordate at the base, coarsely toothed
and nervose below, shortly pubescent; flowers yellowish; stamens not
produced into an appendage beyond the anther cells.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Addai,
Mittu-land, Niamniam-land, Kero, Lake No).

The powdered root is used for piles, dysentery, and dyspepsia; the seeds
are used in skin diseases, leprosy, etc.


                            =MENISPERMACEÆ.=


16 =Tinospora Bakis= _Miers._ ERG EL HAGGAR (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Woody climber with thick fleshy bark. Leaves cordate, entire, glabrous.
Racemes axillary or at end of lateral shoots. Flowers small diœcious,
solitary or fascicled in the axils of minute bracts.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (Wadi El Ain, J. Kōn, J. Tellele,
Daragaza).


17 =Desmonema mucronulatum= _Eng._

Climber. Leaves rhomboid sub-cordate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: J. Baginze).


18 =Chasmanthera dependens= _Hochst._

Climber. Leaves rotundate ovate, more or less lobed; inflor. in pendent
racemes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dinka-land: Lau, Jur-land: Wau, & Kutshuk Ali).


19 =Cocculus Leæba= _DC._ ZEGAI or ZEGAIN (Kordn.)—Arab.

Woody climber with red berries. Leaves alternate, oblong, ½ to 1 in.
long. Flowers green, diœcious, small. Male flowers in axillary panicles;
sepals, petals and stamens 6 respectively. Female flower solitary or in
pairs on axillary peduncles; style 3-armed.

Red Sea Prov. (Port Sudan to Soturba); Berber Prov. (Atbara); Blue Nile
Prov. (Abu Haraz); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El
Ghazal Prov.

Used in native medicine in various parts of the world for intermittent
fevers. It contains two alkaloids and is similar to the official Pareira
Brava in properties.


=C. Holopeira-torrida= _Miers._ GUMALI (Fung)—Arab; LELINGA—Bari.

Pubescent, woody climber. Leaves sometimes very variable, from hastate-
lanceolate to deltoid rotundate, or hastately 3-7 lobed. Male flowers
fascicled, sessile or nearly so. Female flowers fascicled or solitary,
subsessile.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Bahr El Jebel: Bor Mission,
Malik).

In Dar-Fung the pounded stem is given with Durra to donkeys for cough.


20 =Cissampelos Pareira= _Linn._ DERE—Golo.

Climber with reniform-cordate leaves. Flowers diœcious. Male flowers in
axillary, usually branched racemes, tetramerous; petals connate into a
4-lobed cup; stamens monadelphous. Female flowers in long, usually
simple racemes, with numerous broad foliaceous bracts.

Fung, & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.

The Golo women wear the plant round their necks to bring luck. In India
it is used as a mild tonic and diuretic.


=C. mucronata= _A. Rich._

Climber with broadly ovate leaves widely cordate at the base and a
little peltate, laxly pubescent below. Male flowers in rather short
cymes.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post).


=C. rigidifolia= _Eng._

Climber with very broadly ovate peltate leaves about 3 in. long, softly
tomentose below; male flowers in long slender racemes of umbels.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ibba River, near Nganye, Nabambisso River in
Niamniam-land).


21 =Stephania abyssinica= _Rich._

Wiry climber with small broadly ovate leaves peltate and rounded at the
base, glaucous and strongly reticulate, glabrous; flowers small in
axillary cymes.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


                           =ARISTOLOCHIACEÆ.=


22 =Aristolochia bracteata= _Retz._ ABU- and UM-GALAGEL (or ABJALAJEL),
ERG EL AKRAB (or AGRAB), UM GEREISAT—Arab; LEJIR (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka; KĀWKAWL (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Trailing, glaucous herb, glabrous except inside the perianth. Leaves
alt., ovate-subcordate, ¾ in.-2 in. long, crenulate-undulate. Flowers
solitary, axillary; bracts cordate, about ½ in. long; per. tube green,
yellow inside, with short reflexed hair, dilated and globose at base,
tubular above, about ½ in. long; limb maroon-coloured, unilateral,
ligulate, 1 in. long; st. 6; styles 6. Caps. subglobose, about ½ in.
diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Sinkat, J. Waratab); Kassala Prov. (Goz Regeb);
Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Wad Shallai, Salati, J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov. (Taiara to J. Eliri); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El
Zeraf); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel.

The whole plant is very bitter and is said to have anthelmentic and
purgative properties. A portion made of pounded roots and water is used
to calm abdominal pains. The leaves and roots are also used as a cure
for boils and guinea-worm. It is believed to be an antidote to snake-
poison and scorpion bites; the Sudanese wear the plant as a charm to
avert scorpion stings, and also rub the charred roots on the site of the
sting.


=A. bongoensis= _Engl._

Glaucous twining herb. Leaves cordate, obtuse about 1½ in. long and
wide; basal nerves about 8; pet. 1 in. long. Infl. elongated; bracts
cordate-ovate, amplexicaul. Flowers not known. Caps. obovoid, about 2
in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: near Sabbi).


23 =Pararistolochia triactina= _Hutch._ & _J. M. Dalz._

                   _Aristolochia triactina_ Hook. f.

Woody climber; stem smooth, shining. Leaves deeply cordate, entire to 3-
or obscurely 5-lobed, ¾ in. long and wide; pet. 1-4 in. long. Flowers in
short axillary racemes; per.: lower part obliquely ovoid, 1½ in. long,
tube curved, 2 in. long, ½ in. diam., ciliate at throat, lobes 3, sub-
equal, patent, triangular-caudate, 2 in. long, anthers and stigmas 10.
Fruit about 1 ft. long and 1½ in. diam.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


                             =HYDNORACEÆ.=


24 =Hydnora sp.= TARTŪS—Arab.

Parasitic, fungus-like plant with a fleshy, warted, subterranean
rhizome. Flowers large evil-smelling.

Kassala, Blue Nile & Fung Provinces.

Parasitic on roots of Acacia sp. The rhizomes contain a large percentage
of tannin and are used medicinally as an astringent in dysentery and
also for tanning skins.


                              =PIPERACEÆ.=


25 =Piper umbellatum= _Linn._

Erect shrub, 4-5 ft. high; branches jointed at the nodes. Leaves
reniform, 3-12 in. across, cuspidate, deeply cordate, basal nerves
11-13; pet. sheathing at base. Umbels of 2-7 spikes on short axillary
peduncles. Flowers minute 2-sexual; per. 0; stamens about 3; stigmas 3;
fr. trigonous; bracts suborbicular, ciliate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: near Nakofo River).


=P. guineense= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Stout woody creeper, climbing by means of densely hairy adventitious
rootlets. Leaves ovate, acuminate, cordate to cuneate, 4-5 in. long,
glabrous except under the nerves; petals up to ¾ in. Spikes solitary,
leaf-opposed, in fruit up to 4 in. long; bracts rotundate, peltate; per.
0; stigmas 3. Fr. globose, mucronate, about ⅙ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Deim Guju, Niamniam-land: Rivers
Boddo, Atasilli & Kalensho).


=P. capense= _Linn. f._ ADURAKA—Zande.

Erect or climbing shrub; branches swollen at the nodes. Leaves ovate,
shortly acuminate, about 4 in. long, base cordate or rounded, pellucid-
dotted, 5-7 nerved, villous beneath on nerves; petals about 1 in. long.
Catkins at end of short lateral branches appearing to spring from middle
of petiole, about 2 in. long; peduncles about ¾ in. long; bracts
peltate; per. 0; stamens 2-3, anther-cells with wide connective stigmas
2, recurved. Fr. obtuse, compressed, sessile.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


26 =Peperomia knoblecheriana= _Schott._

Succulent glabrous annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves, except 2 lowest,
alternate, rotundate-ovate, ⅛ in. long, subcordate. Spikes solitary and
terminal, lax, ¼ in. long; flowers 8-12; per. 0; stamens 2. Berry
subglobose, minute, blackish.

Banks of the Bahr El Jebel (5°-7° Lat. N.).


                             =PAPAVERACEÆ.=


27 =Argemone mexicana= _Linn._

Herb; leaves prickly; flowers yellow. Capsule with 4-7 placentas,
dehiscing at apex into short valves.

Red Sea Prov.; Khartoum Prov.

Introduced.

The seeds are acrid and possess emetic and cathartic properties, they
are poisonous in large doses. They yield an oil which has been suggested
for use in soap-making and as an illuminant, and which has been classed
as a drying oil.


                             =FUMARIACEÆ.=


28 =Fumaria officinalis= _Linn._

Pale, weak annual, with white, rose or purple flowers. Leaves much
divided.

White Nile Prov. (probably introduced).


                             =TURNERACEÆ.=


29 =Wormskioldia lobata= _Urban._

Herb, 18 in.; stems not bristly. Flowers dilute yellow. Petals clawed.
Stamens 5, unequal. Capsule linear, almost moniliform. Seeds pitted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Bahr El Jebel).


=W. pilosa= _Schwfth._—_W. heterophylla_ Sch. & Thonn.

Stout herb; stems with numerous purplish bristles. Leaves alternate, 4-5
in. long, lanceolate, toothed or pinnately lobed. Peduncles axillary,
about 5-flowered. Flowers yellow. Petals clawed. Stamens 5, unequal.
Capsule moniliform.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


                            =CAPPARIDACEÆ.=


30 =Cleome chrysantha= _Dec._ SAFEIRA, ASIN (Dongola)—Arab.

Herb, up to 18 in. high. Leaves simple, oblong to rotundate-ovate.
Flowers in axils of upper leaves; stamens 10-14. Capsule oval-oblong,
about ¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., from sea level to 4,000 ft.); Halfa Prov.;
Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov. (Berber Desert & Wadi Aros).


=C. scaposa= _DC._

Hispid herb; flowers small. Leaves simple ovate to orbicular or cordate.
Stamens 6. Capsule linear, up to 1½ in. long. Seeds minutely pitted.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber at Wadi Omarig); Red Sea Prov. (sea coast
22° Lat. N., J. Waratab); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land); Khartoum Prov. (J. Royan).


=C. monophylla= _Linn._ LISAN EL TEIR (Meshra El Zeraf—Arab; AKIA
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Erect herb, up to 2 ft. high. Flowers deep violet; pod on short
gynophore, linear, cylindrical, straight. Leaves simple, lanceolate.
Stamens 6.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Haraza and J. Kurbaj); Upper White Nile Prov.
(Meshra El Zeraf); Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé); Darfur Prov. (Kulme);
Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=C. arabica= _Linn._

Erect scabrous herb; leaves 3-foliolate. Racemes leafy; stamens 5-6.
Capsule linear-oval, pendulous.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov.; throughout Libya and the Sudan.


=C. tenella= _Linn. f._

Glabrous herb, 1-2 ft. high; leaves 3-fol., leaflets filiform. Stamens
6.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov.


=C. brachycarpa= _Vahl._ ABULIKEITA (N. Kordn.)—Arab; BERBA’A (Port
Sudan), & BERBERAN—Hadendowa.

Low herb, 4-8 in. high; leaves 1-5 fol. Stamens 6 (one sometimes
imperfect). Capsule elliptical, about ¼ in. long.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.: at Ras Renai, near Saltpans);
Kordofan Prov. (at Helba & Hadfia).


=C. viscosa= _Linn._ RIHAN (Meshra El Zeraf), KOWAL (Blue Nile)—Arab.

Glandular pubescent herb, 1-2 ft. high; leaves 3-5 fol. Flowers yellow.
Pod without gynophore, linear, cylindrical.

Red Sea Prov.; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.;
White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El
Zeraf); Darfur Prov. (Barkin)

The seeds are used for removing impurities from the eyes. (Similar to
No. 37 below.)


=C. polyanthera= _Schwfth._ & _Gilg._

A slender branched herb with digitate leaves and 3 linear leaflets.
Flowers pink or white in lax racemes on very slender pedicels. Fruits
linear, stipitate, 2 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Jur-land: Gir and between Agada &
Kutshuk Ali).


=C. niamniamensis= _Schwfth._ & _Gilg._

Similar to above but dwarfer. Flowers subsolitary and fruits only ½ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Gumango Hills on gneiss).


=C. paradoxa= _R. Br._ NA’ANAA & MUFRAK EL ROWAIR (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Erect shrubby plant, 2-3 ft. high; leaves 3-6 fol.; corolla bright
yellow or rose. Capsule linear, 4 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat & 21° N. Lat.); Kassala Prov. (J. Erimbat, Goz
Regeb); Between Suakin & Berber; Kordofan Prov.


=C. diandra= _Burch._

Glabrous or thin-glandular herb; leaves 3, 5 or 7 fol.; leaflets narrow.
Perfect stamens 2. Capsule narrow linear, 2-3 in. long.

Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=C. Hanburyana= _Penzig._

A rank herb; stems covered with gland-tipped hairs; leaflets 5,
glabrescent, gradually changing into bracts: flowers pink, racemose-
corymbose. Fruits 3½ in. long, glandular-puberulous.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., sea level to 3-4,000 ft.).


=C. cf. C. Hanburyana= _Penzig._

Similar to above but much more pubescent.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., sea level to 3-4,000 ft.).


31 =Gynandropsis gynandra= _(L.) Briq._ TAMALEIKA—Arab; AKAKI—Dinka;
KURE—Zande.

Erect herb; leaves 5-fol.; flowers white or purplish; stamens long,
inserted on the gynophore. Pod linear, slightly curved, 2-3 in. long.

Berber, Bahr el Ghazal, Khartoum, Kassala, Red Sea, Blue Nile, Fung,
White Nile, Kordofan, Darfur & Mongalla Provinces.

The seeds are anthelmintic, and together with the leaves, are used in
native medicine. The plant is also eaten as a vegetable.


32 =Dipterygium glaucum= _Dec._ SAFEIRA—Arab; WAKERIS-HAQ—Hadendowa;
ZEIBUG—Rashida.

Shrubby herb. Leaves small, oblong or ovate; capsule elliptical, with a
membranous wing, 1-seeded, strongly reticulate.

Nubia; Berber Prov.; Between Suakin & Berber; Kassala Prov.

A camel fodder plant.


33 =Cratæva Adansonii= _DC._ DABKAR & UM BUKHEISA—Arab; KLIEH (J. Eliri)
& BURURU (Kadugli)—Nuba; TIFTA—Bari; BIUT (Renk), KAI (Kaka), KAT, KAIT,
KIT or KOG (Mongalla)—Dinka; ABUDEH—Shilluk; AGAILI—Hameg; KÄICH—Nuer.

Small to large tree. Leaves 3-fol.; flowers white, scented, with long
purple stamens. Fruit a globose berry, about 2 in. in diameter, on
thickened gynophore.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (Birket Kolli); Upper White
Nile Prov. (Kodok); Bahr El Arab; Generally distributed south of Lat.
14° N.

The fruit is edible; the bark and the leaves are used medicinally. The
tree occasionally attains a large size, e.g., Jonglay, Atem River. The
wood is moderately hard, even grained, but not very durable. The
medullary rays are thin and very numerous, the pores being uniform,
rather small, arranged in short lines and curves.


34 =Capparis spinosa= _Linn._ LASSAF—Arab.

Trailing shrub. Leaves coriaceous, rotundate; stipular spines recurved
or nearly straight. Flowers 1-3 in. across, axillary, solitary or in
loose lateral racemes, white. Frui. oval, oblong, on a strong gynophore.

Kordofan Prov.

The buds furnish the edible capers of commerce.


=C. galeata= _Fres._ LASAF—Arab.

Spinose trailing shrub. Leaves ovate to rotundate with curved mucro.
Flowers large axillary, solitary. Fruit clavate-pyriform 3-4 in. long on
a stalk up to 2 in. long.

Nubia: Red Sea Prov. (J. Hotarber, 22° N. Lat. & 21° N. Lat., and near
Sinkat, from sea level to 4,000 ft.).


=C. tomentosa= _Lam._ HEKKABIT, MURDU, SHAROBA, or GULUM—Arab; KUBDI
(Dilling)—Nuba; LULUMEH—Bari; BAN or ABBAN, BORID (Kaka &
Kenissa)—Dinka; BUT—Shilluk; UNGONO—Jur; MANGAMANGA—Golo.

Scandent prickly shrub with velvety elliptical leaves. Flowers white
with indefinite pink stamens, solitary and axillary or in terminal
racemes or corymbs.

Widely distributed south of Lat. 15° N. and in the Red Sea Prov.

The shrub is stated to be poisonous to camels.


=C. persicifolia= _A. Rich._

Scandent prickly shrub; prickles paired on each side of the petiole.
Leaves oblong-elliptic, about 2 in. long, obtuse, nearly glabrous;
pedicels 1 in. long. Fruit ellipsoid, 1 in. long, stipitate.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: near the Gash River);
Berber Prov. (Atbara, left bank); Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: by the River Rohl, & Niamniam-land: by the
River Ibba).


=C. micrantha= _A. Rich._

Prickly, straggling shrub. Flowers small, white, sub-corymbose. Leaves
oblong-lanceolate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek, Shambé); Mongalla Prov. (at 4° 54″
N. Lat.).


=C. corymbosa= _Lam._

Prickly, scrambling shrub. Leaves ovate or elliptical. Flowers in
lateral or terminal corymbs or fascicles.

Fung Prov. (Saoleil, etc.); White Nile Prov. (El Dueim); Darfur Prov.;
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dilling).


=C. djurica= _Gilg_ & _Ben._

Shrub with densely pilose branches. Leaves ovate or ovate-oblong, about
1¼ in. long and about ½ in. broad, emarginate. Flowers in rather dense
racemes. Sepals glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=C. jodotricha= _Gilg_ & _Ben._

Climbing shrub; young branches tomentose; spines large, recurved. Leaves
ovate, 2 in. long, 1¼ in. broad, at first densely pilose, at length
glabrous. Flowers in fascicles, crowded. Sepals tomentose outside.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok).


=C. Rothii= _Oliv._ MURDU (Baggara), & SH’AIBEIT (Fung)—Arab; MUARTA
(Dilling)—Nuba; RIADI—Bari; RIAT (Bor)—Dinka.

Thorny climber or small tree. Leaves elliptic-oblong, often emarginate.
Flowers white, in axillary fascicles, up to 6 flowers. Fruit globose,
somewhat pointed, about 1 in. across, turning red when ripe.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok, Renk, Melut); Mongalla Prov.


=C. erythrocarpa= _Isert._

Thorny climber. Fruit scarlet, hexagonal, about size of a walnut. Leaves
elliptical, obtuse. Flowers axillary, solitary, 2 in. across.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Kuddu, Bongo-land: Baiko).


=C. aphylla= _Roth._


=C. decidua= _Pax._ TUNDUB—Arab; SAROP—Hadendowa; KAMRE (J. Daier), &
SHIMEIL (Dilling)—Nuba; NANGOT—Shilluk.

Shrub or small tree, spiny and generally leafless. Flowers pink; fruit
size of a small cherry.

Widely distributed north of Lat. 13° N., also occurs in Bahr El Ghazal
Prov.

The fruit (Arabic, HUNBUG) is edible, the plant is considered useful for
boils, eruptions, swelling and affections of the joints.


35 =Boscia octandra= _Hochst._ MOKHEIT & UMKHEIT (Darfur)—Arab; FOG
(Renk)—Dinka; ATOKA—Golo; DEB (Ghabat El Arab)—Nuer; ARAY—Jur.

Shrub or small tree. Leaves more or less oval, thick and dark coloured;
flowers sub-umbellate or racemose, sweet scented. Fruit globose under ½
in. diameter. Stamens 8-20. Widely distributed south of Lat. 16° N.

The fruit, called KURSAN by Arabs, is edible; an emulsion of the leaves
is used as an eyewash.


=B. angustifolia= _A. Rich._ TIRLING (J. Daier)—Nuba.

Tree or shrub. Flowers greenish, fragrant. Leaves coriaceous, narrow,
lanceolate, oblong or obovate. Fruit globose, under ½ in. diameter.
Stamens 6-9.

Kordofan Prov.; Whole Sudan through Kordofan.


=B. firma= _Rad._

Woody shrub with crowded fasciculate, narrowly oblong elliptic leaves,
1½ in. long, ½ in. broad, very strongly reticulate below. Racemes very
short. Fruits sub-globose, very small.

Fung & Kordofan Provinces.


=B. salicifolia= _Oliv._ SAHAI (Kordn.), TILEITILLA (N. Kordn.),
KARAUERAU (Baggara), & SESIFAN (Fung)—Arab; KOLWAKAI (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Shrub or a straight, graceful tree. Leaves elongate-linear or
lanceolate, 2-5 in. long. Flowers in axillary racemes; stamens 6-14.
Fruit ellipsoid-globose, ¾ in. long, shortly stipitate.

Fung, White Nile, Kordofan, Darfur & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.


36 =Courbonia virgata= _A. Brongn._ KARKADAN (Mongalla), KURDAN
(Baggara)—Arab; DAYA—Bari; ABRO—Golo.

Glabrous, glaucous shrub or undershrub, with leafy, virgate branches;
flowers axillary, solitary; petals 0. Leaves glaucous, elliptical to
ovate. Fruit globose, about 1 in. diameter.

Red Sea Prov.; Berber Prov.; Blue Nile, Fung, White Nile, Kordofan &
Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.

The ashes of leaves and stem are used as a substitute for salt. Fruit
edible.


=C. decumbens= _A. Brongn._

Bush. Leaves glaucous, ovate, faintly 3-nerved, 1¼ in. long, mucronate.
Flowers axillary, solitary. Fruit sub-globose, 1¼ in. long, beaked.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi Plains).


37 =Cadaba glandulosa= _Forsk._ IRKIS (White Nile), KURMUT SOGHEIR—Arab.

Undershrub. Leaves small, round, closely packed on the branches. Racemes
terminal, few-flowered. Petals none; petaloid appendix ligulate. Stamens
5. Fruit oblong, ½ in. long, on a gynophore.

Red Sea Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Jebelein); Kordofan &
Darfur Provinces.


=C. rotundifolia= _Forsk._ KURMUT, or rarely ADDIMIR (Blue Nile)—Arab;
YAM—Hadendowa; KOG (Renk)—Dinka.

Shrub. Leaves orbicular. Flowers in terminal racemes. Sepals 2; petals,
2 green and a yellow tubular nectary; stamens 5; ovary 1-celled.

Red Sea Prov.; Berber Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Fazoghli);
Upper White Nile Prov.

The plant is said to be a powerful purgative.


=C. farinosa= _Forsk._ SURREIH or SURRAYA (Fung)—Arab; NIADA—Bari; BUT
(Renk), & ANEIT or NEIT (Mongalla Prov.)—Dinka.

Undershrub or scrambling climber. Fruit slightly torulose; seeds covered
by bright orange inner membrane of capsule. Leaves oval-oblong,
apiculate, mostly in fascicles. Flowers greenish; sepals 4; petals 4;
stamens 5; ovary 1-celled.

Red Sea, Kassala, Berber, Khartoum, Blue Nile, Fung, White Nile, Upper
White Nile & Darfur Provinces.


=C. longifolia= _DC._

Glabrous shrub, or extremities mealy. Leaves linear-oblong or
lanceolate. Flowers in terminal corymbs; petals 4; appendix linear-
lanceolate, as long as sepals; stamens 4.

Red Sea Coast; North of Kassala.


38 =Maerua jasminifolia= _Gilg_ & _Ben._ BUDU—Bari.

Shrub or small tree. Leaves 3-fol., fruit globose.

Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé).


=M. variifolia= _Gilg._ & _Ben._

Shrub; branchlets softly pubescent. Leaves elliptic, mucronate, 1½ in.
long, slightly pubescent. Flowers sub-corymbose; pedicels ¾ in. long;
petals small with crinkled margins. Fruits torulose, about 1 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Mongalla Prov.


=M. crassifolia= _Forsk._ SAREH, SARHA or SURRAKH (Berber), KOWOGE
(Baggara)—Arab; KAMOP (Port Sudan)—Hadendowa; TUMBU (Kadugli)—Nuba.

Stiff tree or shrub with spinose branches. Leaves small, up to ¾ in.
long, obovate to linear-oval. Flowers axillary, 1-3 together; petals 0;
stamens indefinite. Fruit torulose.

Red Sea Prov. (from sea level to 4,000 ft.); Dongola Prov.; Berber
Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Bara & Abu Gamaiz); Darfur Prov.


=M. aethiopica= _Oliv._ BAK BELE—Golo.

Erect, virgate shrub. Leaves oblong to elliptical. Flowers corymbose;
petals 4, rotundate; stamens indefinite. Fruit coriaceous, subglobose.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Kutshuk Ali, Jur
Ghattas & Jur Aweit, Bongo-land, Gir).


=M. angolensis= _DC._ MARI (Khasa, Red Sea Prov.), RAU ER AU (Kordofan
at Birket), SHAGAR EL ZERAF (Kordn.), & SHAGAR EL DUD (Fung)—Arab;
DOGHING (J. Daier)—Nuba; SHALEIB (Erkowit)—Hadendowa; AFIAT
(Renk)—Dinka; TIIT (Ghabat El Arab)—Nuer.

Small tree. Flowers white. Fruit moniliform. Leaves lanceolate to
obovate.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has); Kassala Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile
Prov. (Jebelein & near Nyemati); Upper White Nile Prov. (Ghurab El Eish,
near Melut, Um Songur, etc.); Kordofan (El Birkat); Darfur (Jebel Marra,
Kallokitting 4,000 ft.).

Wood yellowish, heavy, hard and fine grained, but brittle; takes a good
polish.


=M. dolichobotrya= _Gilg_ & _Ben._

Woody shrub, 3 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, about 2
in. long, ⅓ in. broad, glabrous. Flowers in elongated leafy racemes.
Petals shortly clawed, rather thick.

White Nile Prov.


=M. oblongifolia= _A. Rich._ ERG EL MEHABBA (White Nile), ASS’AIB
(Atbara), SURREIH (Fung), ABU TAMARA (C. Kordn.), ALAG & SIRH
(Khartoum)—Arab; KAFITO & NIETEH—Bari; BUN—Burun; ANEIT (Goz el
Siada)—Dinka.

Straggling shrub. Leaves linear-oblong, calyx pale green, 4 sepals;
petals 4, whitish green, stamens indefinite; gynophore white. Fruit
about 1 in. long, very torulose or moniliform.

Red Sea Prov.; Between Suakin & Berber (J. Langeb); Berber Prov.
(Atbara); Khartoum & White Nile Provinces; Most parts of the Sudan south
of Khartoum.

Fruit edible.


                             =MORINGACEÆ.=


39 =Moringa aptera= _Gaertn._ MAI—Arab.

Moderate to small-sized tree with whip-like branches and scanty, minute
leaves. Flowers pink. Fruit capsules ridged, about 1 ft. long; seeds not
winged.

Red Sea Prov. (rare).


=M. pterygosperma= _Gaertn._

Small tree with corky bark. Leaves usually tripinnate. Flowers strongly
scented; petals white with yellow dots at base. Pods up to 13 in. long,
slender, 9-ribbed. Seeds winged.

Introduced from India. Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Bareis); Darfur
Prov., etc.

The seeds yield the Ben Oil.


                              =CRUCIFERÆ.=


40 =Matthiola elliptica= _R. Br._

Herb with a white flower, like a small Stock. Leaves petiolate,
elliptic, hoary; pod siliquose, rather thick.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Ashat, and 21° N. from sea level to 3-4,000 ft.);
White Nile Prov.


=M. sp.=

Hoary herb with subsessile, lanceolate toothed leaves, about 1 in. long;
hairs stellate. Pods subsessile, very hairy.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib).


41 =Nasturtium indicum= _Linn._ FIKKI (Darfur)—Arab.

Glabrous branching herb. Leaves sessile, lyrate-pinnatifid, auricled.
Flowers yellow, small in lax racemes. Siliqua nearly ¾ in., cylindrical.

Dongola Prov. (Argo Island); Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post);
Kordofan Prov.


42 =Morettia Philæana= _DC._ TAGHAL (Atbara), SAGGAR—Arab.

Stiff, erect, hispid herb. Leaves linear-lanceolate to oblanceolate,
hoary or hispid. Petals slightly longer than the very hairy sepals.
Fruits strongly curved, ⅓ in. long.

Wadi Halfa; Berber Prov. (Atbara, Murat); Dongola Prov. (Omdi); Kordofan
Prov. (Maties).

Good camel fodder.


=M. canescens= _Boiss._

A stiff herb covered with whitish stellate hairs. Leaves elliptic,
subacute, petiolate. Fruits ribbed, slightly curved, ½ in. long,
stellate-pubescent.

Near Wadi Halfa.


43 =Anastatica Hierochuntica= _Linn._

Woody herb. Fruit short, with a round auricle on each side of the apex.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., from sea level to 4,000 ft.).

The common Rose of Jericho of the Mediterranean.


44 =Farsetia ægyptiaca= _Turr._ DAHAIAN (Atbara), GHARBA—Arab.

Shrubby; flowers white; siliquas small, oval. Leaves linear, hoary.

Nubia; Between Goz Regeb & Kassala; Red Sea Prov. (near Karora).


=F. longisiliqua= _Dec._ DAKHEYAN (N. Kordn.), & DAHAIAN (C.
Kordn.)—Arab.

Hoary undershrub. Leaves narrow-linear. Flowers in spicate racemes,
rather distant. Siliqua linear, slightly curved, hoary, 1 in. long.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (J. Kurbaj); Darfur Prov.
(Kulme, & Sherif Kabbashi); Red Sea Prov. (near Karora).


=F. grandiflora= _Fourn._ UMHABEIBA (White Nile)—Arab.

Slender, erect, pale annual. Leaves linear-lanceolate, 1-3 in. long.
Siliqua linear 1-2 in. long.

White Nile & Upper White Nile Provinces (Hillet Abbas to Meshra El
Zeraf); Kordofan Prov.


=F. ramosissima= _Hochst._

Branching herb. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Flowers densely spicate.
Siliqua short.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., up to 4,000 ft.); Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan
Prov. (Khursi); Darfur Prov. (Plains below J. Marra, 3,000 ft.).


45 =Sisymbrium erysimoides= _Desf._

Herb, 1-3 ft. high. Upper leaves lyrate pinnatisect. Siliquas divergent,
rigid, linear-subulate.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., between sea level & 4,000 ft.).


46 =Diplotaxis erucoides= DC.

Herb, 1-2 ft. high. Lower leaves lyrate-pinnatifid or obovate-toothed.
Flowers white or purplish on ebracteate racemes. Siliqua 1 in. long,
ascending. Seeds biseriate.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Karora).


47 =Eruca sativa= _Lam._ GARGUIR (Egypt)—Arab.

Erect branching herb. Leaves lyrate to oblanceolate, more or less deeply
toothed. Flowers white or yellow on ebracteate racemes. Siliqua linear-
oblong, turgid erect, beaked. Seeds biseriate.

Nubia cultivated.

The seeds yield an oil similar to Colza. The leaves are used as a salad,
and are also fed to cattle.


48 =Schouwia arabica= _DC._ MAHAD, NAMNAM (Egypt)—Arab.

Tall shrubby herb with ovate amplexicaul leaves and purple flowers.
Siliqua elliptical, about ¾ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gash Valley).


49 =Lepidium sativum= _Linn._ Common Cress.

Glabrous annual. Leaves entire to pinnatisect. Flowers white. Siliqua
obovate to nearly rotundate, emarginate.

Khartoum & Kordofan Provinces.

The young plants are eaten. The seeds yield an oil; they are also used
in dysentery and diarrhœa.


50 =Senebiera nilotica= _DC._ RASHAD (Port Sudan), HARRA—Arab.

Riverside herb with small white flowers. Radical leaves linear-
lanceolate or oblanceolate pinnatisect. Silicules cordate-reniform.

North Sudan; Banks of the Nile; Red Sea. Prov.


51 =Enarthrocarpus lyratus= _DC._ RESHAD EL BAHR, SHILTEM, SHIRTEM, &
SHILTAM—Arab.

Herb; flowers yellow, streaked with purple. Radical leaves lyrate-
pinnatifid. Siliquas nodulose, obtusely acuminate.

Dongola Prov. (from Egypt).


=E. pterocarpus= _DC._

Herb, scabrid below. Leaves lyrate-pinnatifid. Siliquas erect, linear-
acuminate, with winged scabrid margins.

Nubia.


52 =Zilla myagroides= _Forsk._ =var. microcarpa= _Oliv._

Shrubby, spiny herb, the spines terminating the branches. Flowers white
or violet, solitary or racemose, silicules ovoid, beaked.

Red Sea Prov., & Nubia.


53 =Raphanus sativus= _Linn._ FIGL—Arab. Horse Radish.

Radical leaves lyrate. Flowers white, yellow or lilac. Siliqua 1-2 in.
long, terete, beaked.

Cultivated everywhere.

The seeds, which yield an oil, are used in native medicine for their
diuretic and laxative properties. The seed pods as well as the roots are
eaten.


                              =VIOLACEÆ.=


54 =Viola nubica= _Hutchinson_, n. sp.

Small annual, 4 in. high. Leaves long-petiolate, spathulate-lanceolate,
acute, 1¼ in. long, nearly ½ in. broad, very thin, subentire, glabrous;
stipules subulate-filiform, entire, 2-lin. long; sepals broadly
lanceolate, long-acuminate; petals ⅓ in. long; spur short and blunt.
Capsule ¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N., sea level to 3-4,000 ft.).


55 =Hybanthus enneaspermus= _Muell._—_Ionidium enneaspermum_ Vent.

Erect or decumbent, much-branched herb, up to 2 ft. high. Flowers blue,
purple or dull red, solitary, axillary.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan
Prov.


56 =Rinorea ilicifolia= _O. Ktze._—_Alsodeia ilicifolia_ Welw.

Shrub or small tree. Leaves strongly spinulose-serrate, coriaceous
shining above, 6-9 in. long. Flowers yellow, in narrow terminal,
racemose panicles. Capsule 3-valved, coriaceous.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=R. oblongifolia= _Marq._

Large tree, buttressed at the foot. Flowers waxy-yellow, in terminal,
many-flowered corymbose or pyramidal panicles. Leaves oblanceolate or
obovate-oblong, 4-8 in. long. Petals contorted.

Niamniam-land (Mbrwole, near the Yuru River & by the Diagbe River).


                              =RESEDACEÆ.=


57 =Caylusea canescens= _St. Hil._ MUDDEYD & DENABA—Arab.

Diffuse or ascending herb, more or less pilose. Leaves linear-lanceolate
to lanceolate, undulate. Flowers small, in terminal bracteate racemes.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Khor Tamanib & J. Shellal, 22° N. Lat.).


=C. abyssinica= _Fisch._ & _Mey._

Erect herb, up to 3 ft. high, glabrous or thinly scabrid near the
extremities. Leaves entire or 3-partite, linear-lanceolate or linear.
Flowers small, numerous on terminal, spike-like racemes up to 1 ft. and
more long.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., between sea level & 4,000 ft.).


58 =Reseda pruinosa= _Del._

Erect or ascending herb, 1 ft. or more high. Leaves entire or trifid,
narrow-lanceolate or oval. Flowers in terminal, bracteate racemes.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., between sea level & 3-4,000 ft.).


59 =Oligomeris glaucescens= _Camb._

Erect or decumbent herb, usually glabrous and glaucous. Leaves entire,
linear, fasciculate or scattered. Flowers small in loose, elongate
terminal spikes.

Red Sea, Dongola & Kordofan Provinces.


60 =Ochradenus baccatus= _Del._ GURDI—Arab.

Much branched shrub, with virgate branches, which are often spinescent
and at length leafless. Leaves narrow linear. Flowers small, spicate.
Berries white.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov.; Kassala Prov. (North); Darfur (Jebel Meidob and
Kulme).


                             =POLYGALACEÆ.=


61 =Polygala persicariæfolia= _DC._

Erect or decumbent annual. Leaves oval or lanceolate, acute. Flowers in
extra-axillary or terminal racemes. Wing sepals rotundate-ovate, 3-5
nerved; lateral petals semi-hastate or hooked at the base.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).

Wing sepals elliptic and not rounded.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Addai: Bongo-land).

Leaves broader, wing sepals less orbicular than in the type.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=P. abyssinica= _Fres._

Annual or perennial, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves linear or oval, apiculate.
Flowers secund on terminal racemes. Wing sepals ovate to obovate,
3-nerved.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, 7,000 ft. and over, and plains 20-80 m. N.E.
of El Fasher).


=P. liniflora= _Bojer_ ex _Chod._

Branches elongated, erect, grass-like, glabrous. Leaves narrowly linear,
slightly decurrent. Racemes terminal, lax-flowered. Wing sepals
elliptic, clawed, with few nerves.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra).


=P. erioptera= _DC._ HEBEIBU (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab, ANYAIN or LAKSHUA’I
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Erect or diffuse annual. Leaves linear or oblong, obtuse. Flowers
fascicled or on racemes much shorter than leaves. Wing-sepals oval or
obliquely elliptic with 1 broad median nerve.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba & between Suakin & Berber); Kassala Prov.
(Gallabat); Fung Prov. (J. Moya); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Upper
White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla).

=var. canescens= _Chod._

Stems and leaves with grey, dense hairs.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Kordofan Prov.

=var. maxima= _Chod._

Stems and leaves at length glabrous.

Khartoum Prov. (near Khartoum).


=P. arenaria= _Willd_, forma depressa.

Erect or diffuse annual. Leaves linear to obovate-elliptical obtuse.
Flowers in dense strobiliform heads. Wing-sepals variable, oval to
ovate-rotundate, often oblique, nerves faint.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. irregularis= _Boiss._

Low spreading, wiry plant. Leaves oblanceolate obtuse or retuse. Flowers
in loose terminal racemes. Wing-sepals broad-ovate with 3 main nerves.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Taiara, Abu Gerad).


=P. acicularis= _Oliv._

Glabrous shrub. Leaves narrow-linear to acicular. Flowers in erect
terminal racemes or racemes on rigid lateral branchlets. Wing-sepals
obovate-oblong, faintly nerved, deciduous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=P. senensis= _Klotzsch._

Wiry herb or undershrub. Leaves oblanceolate, obtuse. Flowers in very
short lateral racemes or axillary fascicles. Wing-sepals broadly ovate
with numerous looping nerves.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat).


62 =Securidaca longipedunculata= _Fresen._ SAGGAT—Arab.

Branched shrub, 8-10 ft. high. Leaves alternate, coriaceous, linear-
lanceolate to ovate oblong, 1-2 in. long. Flowers rose or purple or
violet or variegated with white, racemose. Fruit a 1-winged samara.

Fung Prov. (Famaka); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


                             =CRASSULACEÆ.=


63 =Tillæa pentandra= _Royle._

Small herb with opposite, fleshy cylindrical subulate leaves, connate at
base. Flowers small, white, solitary, or 2-3 together, axillary. Fruit
of 4-5 free carpels.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 9,000 ft.).


64 =Bryophyllum calycinum= _Salisb._

Shrubby herb, 2-4 ft. high, with barren and purple-spotted flowering
stems. Leaves opposite, fleshy, crenate, either simple, ovate-orbicular
or unequally pinnate with ovate segments. Flowers up to 2 in. long,
pendulous, in paniculate cymes; calyx inflated, striped purple; cor.
reddish-purple; stamens 8, in 2 rows. Fruit of 4 follicles.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


65 =Kalanchoe crenata= _Haw._ HARFIFOIT—Hadendowa.

Tall perennial herb with opposite fleshy, crenate leaves and yellow
flowers.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, foot of Has Has).


66 =Umbilicus botryoides= _Hochst._

Small herb with perennial root-stock. Lower leaves orbicular, loosely
crenate, peltate. Flowering stems usually about 6 in. long bearing a
simple or somewhat branched raceme of pale pendulous flowers.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Abwo, 9,600 ft.).


67 =Sempervivum molle= _Vis._

Softly hairy, fleshy herb. Leaves alternate, fleshy, oval-rhomboid, red-
spotted beneath. Flowers cymose, white or yellow.

Nubia.


                            =SAXIFRAGACEÆ.=


68 =Vahlia viscosa= _Roxb._ SAFEIRA EL BAHR (Atbara), WADE (Halfa)—Arab;
TELGIN—Hadendowa; TEIMER—Rashida.

Prostrate, glandular, pilose herb, with ovate-oblong, opposite leaves
and yellow flowers. Calyx 5-lobed; corolla 5 petals; anthers 5; style
deeply bifid; ovary inferior.

River banks; Wadi Halfa; Berber Prov. (Atbara & Berber); Khartoum, Blue
Nile, Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile, Kordofan & Mongalla
Provinces.


=V. oldenlandioides= _Roxb._

Glandular or pubescent herb with opposite linear leaves. Flowers small,
numerous; calyx tube adnate to ovary, segments 5, short, triangular;
petals 5, epigynous; ovary inferior; capsule sub-globose, small.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad); Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).

NOTE.—These two species of _Vahlia_ are often mistaken for species of
_Oldenlandia_ in _Rubiaceæ_, but are at once distinguished by the free
petals and absence of stipules.


                             =DROSERACEÆ.=


69 =Drosera indica= _Linn._

Small herb. Leaves alternate, linear, the lower half glabrous, the upper
part heavily fringed with gland-tipped tentacles. Flowers white; styles
3.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Gumango).


                           =PODOSTEMONACEÆ.=


70 =Tristicha hypnoides= _Spreng._

Small moss-like herb, attached to boulders in streams or rivers. Leaves
very minute. Flowers solitary, terminal, on peduncles, ¾ in. long in
fruit; per. segments 3; st. 1; styles 2-3; caps. ellipsoid.

South Kordofan Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Wau & Biri River, Mittu-land: Woko River near Kero).


                             =ELATINACEÆ.=


71 =Bergia verticillata= _Willd._

Glabrous procumbent herb, about 1 ft. high, aquatic; stems succulent,
pink. Leaves nearly sessile, lanceolate, tapering at both ends, 1 to 1½
in. long, opposite, stipulate. Flowers crowded in axillary, sub-
verticillate fascicles; stamens 10.

Kordofan Prov.


=B. suffruticosa= _Fenzl._ MIRMID or MIREMIT (Khartoum), RIMITH—Arab;
OKRIT—Hadendowa; SITA—Rashida.

Deep rooted, heather-like undershrub, rooting again where branches touch
the ground. Bark deciduous in papery rust-coloured flakes.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Dongola, Berber, Khartoum, White Nile &
Kordofan Provinces.


=B. ammanoides= _Roth._ RIMÏTH (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Herb under 1 ft. high. Leaves oblanceolate, pilose. Flowers in dense
axillary, sub-verticillate fascicles; stamens 3.

Kordofan Prov.


                           =CARYOPHYLLACEÆ.=


72 =Silene Macrosolen= _Steud._

Somewhat viscid perennial, branching from the base. Flowers pinkish in
forking panicles. Calyx 5-toothed, narrow tubular, up to 1½ in. long,
teeth short; petals much exserted, 5. Carpophore much longer than
capsule; styles 3.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500-9,300 ft.).


73 =Cerastium vulgatum= _Linn._

Downy, somewhat viscid annual, branching at the base. Stem leaves
sessile, oblong to ovate. Flowers white in terminal cymes. Petals
shorter or hardly longer than sepals; styles 5; sepals free.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 8,600 ft.).


74 =Arenaria Schimperi= _Hochst._

Procumbent diffuse perennial. Leaves subulate, ¼ to ½ in. long. Flowers
in loose forking cymes, white; sepals 5, free, 3-nerved; petals 5, equal
to sepals; styles 3; capsule 3-valved.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, above 9,000 ft.).


75 =Spergula arvensis= _Linn._

Slender herbs. Leaves linear, in opposite clusters, appearing whorled.
Flowers small, white, in terminal forked cymes; stamens 5 or 10; styles
5.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., from sea level to 4,000 ft.).


76 =Polycarpon memphiticum= _Fenzl._

A diffuse, densely pubescent herb. Leaves petiolate, and spathulate-
oblanceolate, covered with stellate hairs. Stipules scarious. Flowers
small, crowded in leafy cymes, otherwise as in the next species.

Berber Prov. (Banks of the Nile between Khartoum and Shendi).


=P. Lœflingii= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._

A diffuse, prostrate or ascending, wiry, glabrous herb. Leaves sessile,
linear or linear-spathulate, glabrous. Flowers small, in dichotomous
cymes; sepals 5, with white, scarious edges; petals small, linear;
stamens 3-5; style 3-fid.

Khartoum Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Wau & Mittu-land: Mvolo,
& Bongo-land: Addai); Blue Nile Prov. (near Wad Medani).


77 =Polycarpæa corymbosa= _Lam._

Herb, 2-12 in. high, with a somewhat amarantaceous appearance. Leaves
linear, sessile. Flowers numerous, small, crowded in dense cymes,
forming large flat-topped heads; bracts scarious, silvery, bristle-
pointed.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post); White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Jur Ghattas,
Niamniam-land); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

Said to be a remedy for snake-bite.


=P. eriantha= _Hochst._

Diffuse, slender herb, with numerous flowers in lax cymes, spreading all
over the plant. Sepals loosely pubescent. Leaves linear, about ½ in.
long, with fine setose points.

Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid); Mongalla Prov., Bongo-land (Gir).


=P. spicata= _Arnott._

Small herb; leaves obovate or oblanceolate-spathulate, rosulate; flower-
heads densely fascicled; sepals 5, ovate-lanceolate, scarious; petals 5,
shorter than sepals; stamens 5.

Red Sea Prov.: Lat. 21° N.


=P. fragilis= _Del._

Small herb. Leaves linear-lanceolate, hoary, margins revolute. Flowers
in small, densely fascicled cymes; sepals ovate-elliptic, with
membranous margin, longer than petals.

Red Sea Prov.: from sea level to 4,000 ft., Lat. 21° N.


=P. linearifolia= _DC._

Erect or decumbent herb. Leaves narrow-linear or linear-subulate.
Flowers in terminal, rounded or lax, silvery, many flowered cymes.
Sepals scarious acute, ⅓ to ⅔ longer than petals.

Blue Nile Prov.: White Nile Prov. (South of Lat. 14° N.): Kordofan Prov.
(Hillet Nu & El Obeid); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Jur Aweit).


=P. stellata= _DC._

Erect or diffuse herb. Leaves linear, with axillary tufts. Flowers in
small capitate, divaricate cymes; sepals very acute, much longer than
the petals.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=P. prostrata= _Dec._ HAR, HARA & REYKHA—Arab.

Prostrate herb. Leaves linear-spathulate. Flowers solitary from the
forks. Sepals ovate-lanceolate, with broad membranous margin, hardly
longer than petals.

Nubia; Northern Sudan.


78 =Sphærocoma Hookeri= _T. Anders._

Undershrub, 1-2 ft. high. Branchlets glabrous. Flower heads dense,
globose, spinescent. Leaves fleshy, terete, fascicled.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (J. Hotarba: Soturba Range, Lat. 22° N.).


=S. Aucheri= _Boiss._

Leaves shorter than those of last-named. Branchlets pubescent.

Red Sea Prov.; 21° N. Lat.


                            =MOLLUGINACEÆ.=


79 =Orygia decumbens= _Forsk._

Decumbent herb, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves obovate or rotundate, cuneate,
fleshy, ½-1 in. broad, alternate, glaucous. Sepals 5; petals 0; stamens
12 or more; styles 5; capsules 5-valved.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, between hills & Sinkat); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


80 =Mollugo Cerviana= _Seringe._

Annual; stems erect, slender; branches umbellate. Leaves verticillate-
linear, about ½ in. long. Flowers numerous on long filiform, axillary
and terminal peduncles. Seeds smooth.

Kordofan & Darfur Provinces, Uganda (Nile Province).

Used as medicine for fevers.


=M. Spergula= _Linn._

Diffused decumbent herb. Leaves fleshy, 3-9 in verticils, oval to
lanceolate, 1 in. long. Flowers fascicled; sepals 5; petals 0; stamens
5-10; capsule 3-valved.

Nubia; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Hoo River); Mongalla Prov.
(Bor).

Used medicinally it is stomachic, aperient and antiseptic.


=M. nudicaulis= _Lam._

Annual. Leaves radical, crowded, spathulate, entire, glabrous, about 1½
in. long. Flower stems erect, 4-6 in. long, leafless, trichotomously
branched. Flowers white in lax trichotomous cymes.

Nubia; White Nile Prov. (Jebelein); Kordofan Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.
(Kadugli); Mongalla Prov. (Bor & Mongalla); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


81 =Glinus lotoides= _Loefl._ RABA’A (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; GETAKI
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Annual, with stellate hairs, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves rotundate to
oblanceolate, 1 in. long, radical and pseudo-verticillate. Flowers in
axillary fascicles; sepals 5; petals 0; stamens 5 to many; stigmas 2-5.
Seeds verrucose.

Berber Prov. (Shendi); Kartoum Prov. (Khartoum); Blue Nile Prov. (Dried
pools); Darfur Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).

The plant is said to be a purgative. The tender shoots are eaten.


82 =Gisekia pharnaceodes= _Linn._

Prostrate or ascending, somewhat succulent annual. Leaves opposite,
exstipulate, oblong-spathulate. Flowers small, in axillary clusters;
petals none; carpels 5, distinct, surrounded by sepals.

Red Sea Prov. (littoral); Berber Prov. (Obak); Khartoum, Kordofan &
Darfur Provinces.

Said to be a useful medicine for tapeworm.


=G. rubella= _Hochst._ SHA’ERET EL BAHAYAM (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Much like above but cymes in lax diffuse panicles.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad); Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Shambe).


83 =Semonvillea pterocarpa= _J. Gay._

Erect, branched herb, glaucous, 1-2½ ft. high. Leaves alternate, fleshy,
linear, 1-2 in. long. Flowers small, greenish, in 10-12 flowered,
terminal and leaf-opposed cymes; sepals 5; petals 0; stamens 6-7. Fr.
compressed orbicular, separating in 2 broadly-winged cocci.

Kordofan Prov. (Obeid & Mulbes).


84 =Limeum viscosum= _Fenzl._ TARBA (Khartoum), RUBAA’, also HOMRA (N.
Kordn.)—Arab.

Prostrate, glandular-viscid herb. Leaves alternate, oblanceolate to
rotundate. Flowers small, in extra-axillary, compact cymes; sepals 5,
viscid; petals 0; stamens 7. Fr. dicoccous, bony.

Khartoum & Kordofan Provinces.


=L. indicum= _Stocks._

Diffuse, glandular, puberulous or glabrate herb. Leaves nearly or quite
opposite, rotundate, ⅓ in. long. Cymes sessile or subsessile, axillary;
petals clawed, toothed above; stamens 6-7. Fr. minute dicoccous, bony.

Nubia


=L. linifolium= _Fenzl._ HAREISH (Kordn.)—Arab.

Glabrous herb. Leaves alternate, linear, ½-2 in. long. Cymes compact,
sessile or subsessile; sepals 5; petals 0, 3 or 5, linear-spathulate;
stamens 7. Fr. dicoccous, bony.

Kordofan Prov. (El Murra).


                             =FICOIDACEÆ.=


85 =Aizoon canariense= _Linn._

Hairy, prostrate herb. Leaves obovate to spathulate, up to 3 in. long,
alternate. Flowers sessile, solitary or clustered in axils of leaves.
Calyx 4-5 partite; petals absent. Fruit pentagonal stelliform, ⅓ in.
long.

Red Sea Prov.


86 =Trianthema pentandra= _Linn._ RABA’A (Khartoum) & RAB’AH—Arab; LOM
(Kenissa)—Dinka.

Prostrate herb. Leaves opposite, oval-oblong to obovate-elliptical, ½-2
in. long. Flowers fascicled, axillary; calyx 5-fid; petals 0; stamens 5.
Capsule membranous or coriaceous.

North Sudan; Red Sea Prov.; Kassala Prov.; Dongola, Berber, Khartoum,
Blue Nile & Kordofan Provinces; Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa); Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post).

The plant is used as an astringent in abdominal diseases. The Sudanese
mix one spoonful of pounded roots with one rottl of Marissa and use the
mixture as a remedy for gonorrhœa, the doses being taken for three days.


=T. salsoloides= _Fenzl._ DEILU (N. Kordn.) & DALLE—Arab.

Hairy herb. Leaves opposite, linear, fleshy, ½ to 1 in. long, dilated at
base with membranous stipuliform teeth. Flowers axillary fascicled or on
short lateral leafy shoots. Petals 0; stamens up to 5. Capsule 1-seeded.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).

The ashes mixed with Simsim oil and lime are used for making soap.


=T. polysperma= _Hochst._

Prostrate herb. Leaves opposite or nearly so, fleshy, glandular, ¼ to ½
in. long. Flowers dichotomously cymose, sessile in each fork. Calyx
5-lobed, with petaloid pink margin; stamens 4-6; styles 2; ovary
1-celled, ovules about 7.

Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa); Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Abu
Gerad).


=T. crystallina= _Vahl._ ARARIB (Atbara)—Arab.

Prostrate herb. Leaves fleshy, linear to rotundate, ¾ in. long. Flowers
axillary fascicled.

Red Sea Prov. (sea-coast); Berber Prov. (Abu Hashim & Atbara); Nubian
Desert; Kordofan Prov. (Debakh); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=T. triquetra= _Rottl._ & _Willd._

Diffuse, prostrate herb, covered with minute scales. Leaves opposite or
alternate, over ½ in. long, linear to linear-lanceolate, fleshy. Flowers
numerous, sessile in the axil. Style simple.

Between Kassala & Goz Regeb; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Geteina);
Kordofan Prov.


                            =PORTULACACEÆ.=


87 =Portulaca quadrifida= _Linn._

Prostrate, fatty herb. Flowers yellow. Leaves opposite, oval, numerous,
fleshy. Joints and flower-heads bristly.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Khartoum, Upper White
Nile & White Nile Provinces.


=P. oleracea= _Linn._ RIGLA—Arab. The Purslane.

Succulent annual with obovate or oblong-spathulate, alternate, fleshy
leaves. Flowers in clusters, few together, yellow, open during a short
time in the morning.

Common everywhere. Wild in various parts, e.g., Red Sea, White Nile,
Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.

Used as a vegetable and salad, the seeds are demulcent, diuretic and
slightly astringent.


=P. Erythraea= _Schwfth._

Fleshy; leaves obovate-cuneate, about 1 in. long. Flowers axillary,
sessile, solitary.

No locality given (fide Mrs. Crowfoot).


=P. foliosa= _Kern._

Herb, woody below. Leaves fleshy, terete. Flowers yellow, solitary or in
few-flowered heads, with numerous setæ.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mvolo near Rōl River).


88 =Talinum Caffrum= _E._ & _Z._

Small herb, woody below, somewhat succulent above. Leaves linear-
lanceolate. Flowers axillary, solitary or in pairs, yellow.

Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Tombé).


=T. cuneifolium= _Willd._ DANAB EL TUT (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab;
KUGATABBA—Bongo.

Undershrub. Leaves thick. Flowers carmine; capsules size of a pea,
thinly crustaceous, nodding; seeds numerous.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (J. Dago &
Barku); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=T. crassifolium= _Willd._

Small herb, woody below. Leaves fleshy, elliptic or oblanceolate-oblong.
Flowers red in terminal, few-flowered panicles.

Red Sea Prov. (coast).


                             =POLYGONACEÆ.=


89 =Oxygonum atriplicifolium= _Martelli._

Herb; stem slender, pubescent on one side. Leaves alternate, deltoid to
lanceolate, ¾ in. long; petiole ¼ in. long, dilated into a membranous
sheath (_ochrea_), with long hairs. Racemes 6 in. long; bracts like
ochreæ enclosing 2-3 flowers; per. minute, pink, 5-lobed, becoming
3-spined in fruit; stamens 8; styles 3. Flowers polygamous.

Red Sea Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.

=var. sinuatum= _Baker._

Leaves thicker, pinnately lobed.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib); White Nile Prov. (Hillet Abbas); Kordofan
Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Mongalla Prov. (Bor & Mongalla).


90 =Polygonum plebeium= _R. Br._

Prostrate herb with short internodes. Leaves alternate, linear-oblong, ¼
to ½ in. long; ochreæ membranous, white, lacerate. Flowers clustered
2-5, axillary; per. white, small, 5-lobed; stamens 8. Fr. trigonous,
shining.

Khartoum Prov.; Banks of the Nile; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=P. serrulatum= _Lag._

Slender procumbent annual, 2-3 ft. long. Leaves lanceolate, acuminate,
3-4 in. long, subsessile; ochreæ bristly. Spikes several to a stem;
1½-2 in. long; bracts ciliate; per. pink, minute; stamens 6-8, styles
and nut as above.

Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River);
Mongalla Prov. (Lado).


=P. limbatum= _Meisn._

Perennial 3-4 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate, 3-4 in. long, subsessile,
with stout adpressed hairs; ochreæ large, hairy sheathing below,
deflexed above. Racemes 3 to a branch, 2-3 in. long; per. pink, minute;
stamens 7; styles 2; nut lenticular, glossy, black.

Kordofan Prov. (Rahad); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. barbatum= _Linn._

Hairy perennial. Leaves lanceolate, acuminate, up to 6 in. long,
subsessile, hairy both sides; ochreæ without limb. Spikes, 2-3 in. long;
bracts bristly on margins, per. pink, minute; stamens 6-8; styles 3; nut
trigonous.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Darfur Prov.
(Kulme & J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).

A blue dye, like indigo, is said to be obtained from this plant in China
and Japan. The root is used as an astringent and cooling remedy.


=P. lanigerum= _R. Br._

Hoary aquatic herb, 4-5 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate, up to 9 in. long;
ochreæ long, membranous, ciliate. Racemes dense, 1-3 in. long; bracts
orbicular; per. ⅙ in. long; stamens 6; styles 2; fr. lenticular, black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek & Ghabat El Arab, Bongo: Zariba Agad
Ngulfala); Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa, Yei River).


=P. tomentosum= _Willd._

Tall aquatic herb, more fulvous than the above; stamens usually 7;
bracts truncate, ciliate, otherwise as above.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (Rahad); Upper White Nile Prov.
(mouth of Sobat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Bodumo swamps &
Nabambisso River); Bahr El Jebel (Sudd); Mongalla Prov. Yei River).


=P. senegalense= _Meisn._

Perennial, 4-5 ft. high. Leaves distinctly petioled, oblong-lanceolate,
narrowed both ends, 2-8 in. long; ochreæ large, truncate, not ciliate.
Racemes 2-3 in. long; bracts ovate, not ciliate; per. pale pink, minute;
stamens 7; styles 2; nut orbicular, flattened, shining, blackish.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500 ft).


=P. acuminatum= _H.B._ & _K._ =var. microstemon= _Mart._

Pubescent herb. Leaves lin.-lanceolate, acuminate, 6 in. long, adpressed
hairy on both sides; ochreæ bristly. Spikes dense, 2-3 in. long, 2-4 to
a stem; bracts ovate, ciliate; per. pink, minute, 4-5 lobed; style
bifid; nut lenticular.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. glabrum= _Willd._ TIMSAHIYA (Khartoum)—Arab.

Glabrous marsh herb, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, up to 8 in.
long; ochreæ large, membranous. Spikes dense, 2 in. long; per. pink;
stamens 6-8; styles 2; nut lenticular, orbicular.

Nubia; Dongola Prov. (Saikot); Between Khartoum & Shendi; Blue Nile
Prov. (Bagras, Dinder River); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile
Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, Wadi Gindi 7,300 ft.);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau in Jur).

An infusion of the leaves is used to relieve pain in case of colic.


91 =Rumex abyssinicus= _Jacq._

Very tall herb with perennial root stock; stems hollow, reddish. Leaves
triangular or ovate, hastate, up to 8 in. long; petals up to 4 in. long,
red; ochreæ membranous, ¾ in. long. Panicle terminal, branched, 1 ft.
long; flowers polygamous; per. lobes 6, 3 inner enlarged in fr. to ¼
in.; stamens 6; styles 3, stigmas fimbriate; nut 3-gonous.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6-8,000 ft.).


=R. vesicarius= _Linn._

Branched herb. Leaves deltoid or ovate, 1¼ in. long, cordate, fleshy;
petals up to 1½ in. long. Panicles terminal; flowers 1-2 on jointed ped.
in the whorls; bracts as long as ped., scarious; per. segm. ⅓ in.
diameter in fr., reddish, winged; nut almost 3-winged.

Red Sea Prov. (Littoral); Darfur Prov. (J. Meidob, 4,000 ft.).


=R. nepalensis= _Spreng._

Stout perennial, 3-4 ft. high. Basal leaves long petioled, oblong,
rounded or cordate at base, 1 ft. or more long, cauline ovate-oblong,
cordate to lanceolate. Panicles long, lax, with reduced leaves below;
flowers many in a whorl; pedicels deflexed; inner per. segm. ⅛ in. in
fruit, ovate-cordate margined with hooked teeth; nut ovoid-triquetrous.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Guloberi Wadi, 8,000 ft.).


                            =ILLECEBRACEÆ.=


92 =Paronychia argentea= _Lam._

Densely tufted, pubescent herb, 3-6 in. high. Leaves opposite, lower
oblanceolate, mucronate, upper shorter, oblong; stipules and bracts
white-scarious, the latter completely hiding the flowers which are in
dense terminal clusters; per. very minute, 5-partite lobes hooded at
tip.

Dongola Prov. (Khandak).


93 =Cometes abyssinica= _R. Br._

Erect perennial, 6-12 in. high, pubescent and much branched. Leaves
opposite or verticillate, lanceolate, sessile. Flowers in terminal
clusters, bracts enlarged in fruit, silky, long, whitish, forming
globose, somewhat rotate heads about 1 in. diameter; per. ⅙ in. long,
green.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, Khor Tamanib, Khor Ashat, Has Has, Darfur Prov.
(J. Marra, 6,500 ft. and over).


                            =PHYTOLACCACEÆ.=


94 =Mohlana nemoralis= _Mart._

Erect annual, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves alternate, oblong, acute or
acuminate, up to 6 in. long. Racemes moderately dense, 2-5 in. long;
perianth small, dark green, obliquely campanulate, veined in fr.,
segments 4, unequal, lowest largest; stamens 4; anthers versatile
sagittate; fr. fleshy, lenticular.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Naporruporru).


95 =Phytolacca octandra= _Linn._

Erect perennial, 2-3 ft. high; stems stout. Leaves alternate, oblong,
3-4 in. long. Racemes very dense; per. green, 5-partite; stamens about
8; fr. globose, purple-black.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


                            =CHENOPODIACEÆ.=


96 =Chenopodium album= _Linn._ FISS EL KELAB—Arab.

Erect herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves alternate, ovate-lanceolate, 1-1½ in.
long, coarse-dentate, mealy. Panicles axillary; per. lobes 5,
triangular, incurved; stamens 5, filam. short; styles 2, seed globose,
black-brown.

Kordofan Prov.

The plant is eaten as a pot-herb. It is also said to have laxative
properties.


=C. murale= _Linn._

Erect herb, mealy all over. Leaves ovate, obscurely 3-lobed, coarsely
serrate, 1-4 in. long. Panicles terminal and axillary, more spreading
than in above. Flowers as above.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N. Lat.); Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.;
Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500 ft.).

It is eaten as a pot-herb.


=C. Schraderianum= _Roem._ & _Schult._

Herb, 2-5 ft. high. Leaves pinnatifid, 1-4 in. long, covered with
stalked and sessile yellow glands. Panicle much branched and in zigzags;
per. segments 5; triangular, keeled, with stalked glands.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500 ft.).


97 =Atriplex farinosa= _Forsk._

Undershrub, 3 ft. high. Leaves alternate, lanceolate-oblong, 1½ in.
long, short petioled, some cordate or auricled, densely white-tomentose
beneath. Flowers unisexual, in terminal spikes or panicles, male flower
per. 5-lobed; stamens 3-5; female flower enclosed in 2 orbicular,
tomentose bracts, 1/5 in. diameter in fr., per. 0, styles 2-branched.

Red Sea Prov. (Littoral).


98 =Kochia cana= _Boiss._

Undershrub; branchlets white, obscurely silky. Leaves alternate, oblong,
1/5 in. long, hairy. Infl. subglobose, embedded in long brown hairs,
axillary or terminal, 2-sexual or female; per. lobes 5, incurved and
enlarged in fr.; stamens 5; styles 2-3.

Red Sea Prov. (Littoral).


99 =Halopeplis perfoliata= _Schweinf._

Woody, branched undershrub, 1-2 ft. high, nodes approximate. Leaves
alternate, very small, sessile, decurrent, glabrous. Spikes small,
dense; per. 3-toothed; stamens 1-2.

Red Sea Prov. (Littoral).


100 =Arthrocnemum fruticosum= _Moq._

Undershrub, branches short-jointed. Leaves 0. Flowers 2-sexual, very
small, partially sunk in cylindric, dense spikes 1½-2½ in. long; per.
3-4 lobed; stamens 1-2.

Red Sea Prov. (Saline marshes, Er-Rih Island).


101 =Salsola fœtida= _Del._ DEBERRAH (Nubia) & MULLEY (Egypt)—Arab.

Evil-smelling undershrub, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves alternate, orbicular,
minute, fleshy, imbricate; bracteoles similar. Flowers in short, dense
axillary spikes; per. 5-partite, segments in fr. winged, scarious;
stamens 5; style 2-branched.

Wadi Halfa (on sandstone); Berber Prov. (Obeish); Between Berber &
Khartoum; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & 21° N. Lat.).


=S. vermiculata= _Linn._

Pubescent undershrub. Leaves alternate or fascicled, ovate, up to ⅓ in.
long, keeled at base. Flowers in dense spikes, as above.

Nubia (banks of the Nile, near Tingur).


102 =Suæda fruticosa= _Forsk._ ADLIB—Arab.

Glabrous undershrub, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves alternate, scattered, linear,
fleshy, ¼-⅔ in. long. Flowers minute, axillary, solitary or clustered;
per. urn-shaped in bud; lobes 5; stamens 5; style short, 3-armed.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N. Lat & Littoral).


=S. monoica= _Forsk._

Similar to above; upper leaves larger; flowers larger and mostly
1-sexual.

Between Suakin & Berber (Khor Langeb); Kordofan Prov. (Maties).


=S. Volkensii= _C. B. Clarke._

Succulent undershrub. Leaves oblong, up to ⅓ in. long. Flowers clustered
on nearly continuous spikes. Per. larger than in _S. fruticosa_,
pentagonal, swollen in fruit.

Red Sea Prov. (saline soils on sea-coast).


=S. vermiculata= _Forsk._

Spreading, white tomentose undershrub. Leaves ovate, sub-globose, up to
⅙ in. long, mealy and glandular, tubercled at base. Flowers in dense
spikes; bracts spirally inserted, white-margined; filaments exserted.

Red Sea Prov.


=S. vermiculata= _Forsk._ =var. puberula= _C. B. Clarke._

Leaves linear, up to ⅓ in. long without tubercle.

Red Sea Prov. (Coast).


103 =Cornulaca monacantha= _Del._

Much branched, rigid undershrub. Leaves alternate lanceolate, up to ¼
in. long, curved, ending in a spine, which drops off when old and the
base becomes a cushion. Flowers clustered, buried in wool, polygamous;
per. segments 5, 1 or more spinescent in fruit.

Dongola Prov.


=C. Ehrenbergii= _Aschers._

Leaves densely imbricated, mucronate; flowers solitary, not buried in
wool, axillary, otherwise as above.

Red Sea Prov. (Coast).


                             =AMARANTACEÆ.=


104 =Celosia argentea= _Linn._ DANAB EL KELB (H. Abbas), & SHEIBA
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Branched herb, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves alternate, linear to spathulate-
elliptic, 1-5 in. long; petals 1-2 in. long. Spikes dense, scarious,
silvery-white, pink or straw-coloured, up to 6 in. long; per. ⅓ in.
long, 5-fid; stamens 5, filaments united at base; style 3-branched.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); South of Khartoum; Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Sobat River (Nasser).

The seeds are a remedy for diarrhœa. The plant is sometimes eaten as a
pot-herb; it is also said to yield a strong fibre.


=C. laxa= _Schumach._ & _Thonn._

Branched herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves long-petioled below, ovate to
lanceolate, up to 3 in. long. Infl. much looser than in above, 2-4 in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land by Nabambisso River).


=C. trigyna= _Linn._ BAMBIT (Kordn.), EL BUEIDA (Blue Nile)—Arab.

Straggling herb, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves long-petioled below, ovate or
lanceolate, acuminate, 1-5 in. long. Infl. varying from linear panicles,
4-6 in. long, interrupted, to simple spikes or globular spicate heads, 1
in. in diameter, pink to silvery-white; per. ⅛ in. long; style
3-branched.

Between Korosko & Berber; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Karora); Kassala
Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.
(Fazoghli); White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Zalingei);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov.
(Lado: Yei River: Kagula).

The leaves are eaten as a vegetable.


=C. Schweinfurthiana= _Schinz._

Scrambling herb, 4-5 ft. long. Leaves long-petioled, ovate-lanceolate, 3
in. long. Panicles linear, up to 10 in. long, or elongate, interrupted
spikes; per. 1/10 in. long; style bifid.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. populifolia= _Moquin._

Straggling undershrub, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves petioled, ovate-lanceolate,
base rounded, 3 in. long. Panicles linear, thyrsoid, 4-7 in. long; per.
1/10 in. long, scarious white with dark lines; style bifid. Caps.
1-seeded.

Kassala Prov. (Goz Regeb); Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile
Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Bareis); Darfur Prov.


105 =Digera arvensis= _Forsk._ HARAYRAH, NUARAH, BEBIT or LABLAB AHMAR
(Blue Nile Prov.), & ASFAR (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; AMMĀL (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka; KILUTUM (Meshra El Zeraf)—Shilluk.

Branched herb, 8-20 in. high. Leaves alternate, lanceolate or ovate, 2
in. long. Spikes axillary 2-7, somewhat interrupted, pink; per. 4-5-fid,
⅙ in. long; stamens 5, not united at base: style 2-fid; caps. 1-seeded.

Widely distributed: Nubia (between Suakin & Berber, Wadi Abu Salem);
Kassala Prov.: Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ghabat El Arab).

It is eaten as a pot-herb, also as fodder. The leaves are used to cure
indigestion.


106 =Amarantus caudatus= _Linn._ ORF ED DIK—Arab.

Erect herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves alternate, long-petioled, narrow-
elliptic, 2-12 in. long. Spikes red, linear numerous, mostly in terminal
panicles; bracts numerous, longer than flowers; per. 1/10 in. long,
5-fid; style 3-fid, long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post &
Roseires); Kordofan Prov. (Sigei).

Cultivated for its seed, which is edible. The plant is also cooked and
eaten as a vegetable. The garden variety is known as “Love-lies-
bleeding.”


=A. tricolor= _Linn._

Herb, 1-5 ft. high. Leaves spathulate-ovate, acuminate, up to 4 in.
long; pet. 1-2½ in. long. Spikes axillary and in terminal panicles; per.
1/10 in. long, 3-fid; bracts long-awned, longer than flowers; style
3-branched.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=A. oleraceus= _Linn._

Herb; a weed in cultivation. Leaves ovate-elliptic, 2 in. long, long-
petioled. Spikes axillary and terminal, dense; per. very minute,
segments 3.

Khartoum Prov.


=A. græcizans= _Linn._ FISS EL KELB, & LISĀN EL TEIR—Arab.

A weed in cultivation. Leaves elliptic, 1-2 in. long, long-petioled.
Spikes globose, axillary and terminal; per. segments 3, minute, tailed.

Khartoum, Kassala & Kordofan Provinces.


=A. Blitum= _Linn._ LISĀN EL TEIR (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

A weed in cultivation, 15 in. high. Leaves narrow-oblong to obovate ½-1½
in. long including pet. Spikes copious, axillary; flowers still smaller
than above.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin); Khartoum, Blue Nile, White Nile, Kordofan & Bahr
El Ghazal Provinces.


=A. polygamus= _Linn._

A weed, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves ovate-elliptic, 2 in. long; pet. often
very long. Spikes axillary; flowers as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Fung
Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.


107 =Aerva tomentosa= _Forsk._ GHUBEISH (Nomads, Kordn.), SHEIBA (N.
Kordn.), LERU or (EL) ARA or LARA—Arab; EIGAB—Hadendowa.

Undershrub, 2-4 ft. high, with dense white stellate hairs. Leaves
alternate, lanceolate, 4 in. long. Flowers in spiked terminal, leafless,
dense panicles, 2 in. long; per. 5-fid, ⅛ in. long, hairy; bracts hairy;
stamens 5; filaments united in a tube with alternating staminodes, style
2-branched; caps. 1-seeded.

Widely distributed. Red Sea Prov.; Dongola Prov. (Khandak); Berber Prov.
(Saggadi, Wadi Omari); Khartoum, Blue Nile, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.

The woolly spikes are used for stuffing pillows and donkey saddles. The
roots are used as tooth-brushes. It is used medicinally for horses and
camels.

=var.= β. =Bovel= _Webb._

More tawny than type. Leaves oblong or obovate, 1 in. long. Flowers
smaller; spikes more slender and interrupted.

Red Sea Prov. (between Suakin & Berber); Dongola Prov. (Debba): Kordofan
Prov.


=A. Ruspolii= _Lopr._

Bushy, tawny-woolly herb. Leaves oblong and obovate, ½ in. long,
recurved. Spikes small and interrupted.

Berber Prov. (17° 30′ Lat. N.).


=A. lanata= _Juss._

Woolly herb, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves ovate, 1½ in. long. Spikes axillary
and terminal, ¼-½ in. long; flowers small, densely white-woolly; bracts
glabrous-pointed.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, sea-coast, Erkowit); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Nabambisso River: Niamniam-land).

=var.= β. =oblongata= _Aschers._

Leaves thick, very woolly. Spikes in a dense, narrow panicle, 1 ft.
long.

Red. Sea Prov. (Soturba).


=A. brachiata= _Mart._

More glabrate than _A. lanata_ and smaller. Infl. axillary; flowers very
minute; stamens 2 only.

White Nile, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


108 =Cyathula prostrata= _Blume._

Hairy or glabrate herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves ovate or obovate, 1-4 in.
long. Spikes terminal, 2-6 in. long, ¼ in. wide; bracts with straight
and hooked spines; per. segments 5, blunt or spinose, 1/12 in. long;
stamens 5, alternating with staminodes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Kalenjo).


109 =Pupalia lappacea= _Juss._ LAMRAGA—Bari.

Hairy herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves elliptic-lanceolate, 2-6 in. long.
Infl. in terminal subspicate clusters, 2-4 in. long; flowers about 3
together enclosed by 2 bracts and 4 bracteoles covered with white,
woolly hairs and hooked and barbed spines forming very troublesome
burrs; stamens 5; filaments connate at base.

Red Sea Prov.; Suakin to Berber (Wadi Omari); Fung Prov. (Roseires,
Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol & rocky hills); Kordofan
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Maiuoli, Jur: Dimo); Bahr El Jebel.

At Rejaf the plant is used medicinally, being burnt and the ashes added
to water and drunk for flatulence. It is also said to be used for
leprosy; sores are bled and the ashes of the plant, called DIKERI
TIMALLO, are rubbed in. Patients eat light food and no meat.


110 =Psilotrichum cordatum= _Moquin._

Herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves opposite, ovate, 1½ in. long, hairy. Panicles
terminal, 1-2 ft. long; spikes ½-1½ in. long, 4-12 flowered, bracteoles
2, shorter than flowers; per. segments 5, ⅛ in. long, green, hairy;
stamens 5, filaments joined into a cup at the base.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba).


=P. Schimperi= _Engl._

Glabrous branched herb, 18 in. high. Leaves lin.-oblong, 2 in. long.
Spikes terminal and subaxillary, up to 5 in. long in fruit; per. green.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


111 =Achyranthes aspera= _Linn._ ABRUKAB (Sennar), DANAB EL ABILANI or
FAKHAH or NA’ANA’A (Meshra El Zeraf), ANAWIDIK (Khartoum), ERG EL ASDA &
ERG EL DAM (Blue Nile)—Arab; DARATNIUWA—Hadendowa; EILUKWATEN
(Dilling)—Nuba.

Straggling or erect woody herb. Leaves opposite, elliptic, 2-3 in. long.
Spikes usually simple, 2-18 in. long, occasionally compound and
feathery; bracteoles spiny; fr. deflexed, somewhat prickly.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Khortratib); from Lat. 15° 30′ southwards.

Root chewed and used as a styptic on cuts.


=A. aspera= _Linn._ =var. argentea= _C. B. Clarke._

Leaves silky, strigose beneath with white hairs, often silvery.

Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (near mouth of Bahr El Ghazal);
Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).


=A. aquatica= _R. Br._

Hirsute aquatic herb. Leaves ovate or lanceolate, 3-4 in. long. Spikes 3
in. long; bracteoles small; per. straw-coloured; fr. deflexed as above.

Fung Prov. (Deleib, Khor Agalin, & Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.
(Abba Island & Kosti); Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


112 =Pandiaka cylindrica= _Hook. f._

Hairy herb. Leaves opposite, subsessile, oblong, 1 in. long. Spikes 1½
in. long, pinkish straw-coloured; bracteoles 2, longer than per.,
mucronate, white-hairy; per. ¼ in. long, white-hairy; stamens 5, connate
at base with quadrate alternating hairy staminodes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Limbo’s & Abu Shakka’s, Jur Majob);
Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=P. Heudelotii= _Hook. f._

Hairy herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves sessile, linear, 2-3 in. long. Spikes 1
in. long, green to straw-coloured; bracteoles ⅙ in. long, pointed; per.
1/5 in. long, hairy; stamens as above, glabrous.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. Schweinfurthii= _C. B. Clarke._

Herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves sessile, broad-elliptic or oblanceolate.
Spikes 1½ in. long, terminal, straw-coloured; stamens as above,
staminodes long-fimbriate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


=P. oblanceolata= _C. B. Clarke._

Sparsely hairy herb. Leaves oblanceolate-oblong, 1¾ in. long, sessile.
Spikes 2 in. long, pale-brown; bracteoles 1/5 in., bristle-pointed as is
the per., which is ⅓ in. long; staminodes lacerate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo, Addai).


113 =Alternanthera nodiflora= _R. Br._ ABU TUMRA (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Procumbent hairy herb, 6-24 in. long. Leaves opposite; oblong or
elliptic-lanceolate, ½-2½ in. long. Heads axillary, ⅓ in. diameter,
white; per. segm. ⅙ in. long; stamens 5, filaments united into a cup
with alternate notched teeth.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok).


=A. achyranthoides= _Forsk._

Leaves usually lobed, otherwise as above but per. smaller.

Berber Prov. (Saggadi); Blue Nile Prov. (Wad Medani); White Nile Prov.;
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Wau River); Bahr El Jebel.


                             =BASELLACEÆ.=


114 =Basella alba= _Linn._

Glabrous, much branched, twining herb. Leaves alternate, ovate or
cordate, 2-4 in. long, long-petioled, almost leafless in dry season.
Flowers 2-sexual, in axillary spikes with 2 fleshy bractlets adnate to
per.; per. fleshy, shortly 5-lobed; stamens 5; styles 3. Fr. globose,
enclosed in enlarged per., 1/5 in. diameter, red, white or black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by Nabambisso River).

Cultivated as a Spinach.


                               =LINACEÆ.=


115 =Linum strictum= _Linn._

Erect herb. Leaves linear, scabrid. Flowers yellow, small, in cymose
corymbs. Capsule splitting into 5 2-seeded valves or into 10 1-seeded
valves.

Red Sea Prov.


116 =Hugonia platysepala= _Welw._

Shrub, 6-9 ft. high. Leaves alternate, shining above, broadly
oblanceolate to obovate oblong, acute or cuspidate. Flowers in few
flowered racemes, yellow, over 1 in. across; outer sepals with revolute
margins; stamens monadelphous. Fruit globose, orange-coloured, ½ in.
diameter.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Yuru River).


                            =ZYGOPHYLLACEÆ.=


117 =Tribulus terrestris= _Linn._ DREISA or DEREISA, GATHA (Egypt)—Arab;
KÜRWAI—Nuer.

Prostrate plant with opposite pari-pinnate leaves; fruit of 5 woody
cocci, each with 2 pairs of stiff spines. Flowers solitary yellow.
Sepals and petals 5 each, stamens 10, distinct.

In most parts of the Sudan.

The whole plant, especially the fruit, used medicinally as a diuretic.
The leaves are occasionally eaten.


=T. mollis= _Ehrb._

Like _T. terrestris_, but flowers very small, fruits densely pilose and
with wings rather than horns at the base.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Khartoum Prov.


=T. alatus= _Del._ GATHA (Egypt), DREYS—Arab; SHEISHIG—Hadendowa;
GUTAB—Rashida.

Prostrate herb; fruit spinosely and broadly winged, otherwise much like
_T. terrestris_.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab, etc.); Berber Prov.; Kassala Prov. (Um Adam).


=T. pterocarpus= _Ehrenb._

Prostrate herb; fruit roundish winged, otherwise like _T. terrestris_.

Dongola Prov.; Between Suakin & Berber (Obak).


=T. cistoides= _Linn._

Like _T. terrestris_, but stigmatic lobes not longer than diameter of
style.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=T. Ehrenbergii= _Asch._

Densely villous herb; wings of fruit toothed.

Dongola Prov.


118 =Zygophyllum simplex= _Linn._

Prostrate, succulent, much branched herb. Leaves opposite, 1-fol.,
unequal, fleshy. Flowers yellow, small, on short peduncles. Fruit deeply
5-lobed, small.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat., and Akik); Between Khartoum & Sabil;
White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).

Camel fodder.


=Z. album= _Linn._

Hoary shrub; fruit deeply 5-lobed, obcordate. Leaves diphyllous, fleshy.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov.


=Z. coccineum= _Linn._

Glabrous shrub; fruit 5-lobed. Leaves diphyllous, fleshy.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Soturba hills).


=Z. decumbens= _Del._

Glabrous herb or undershrub. Leaves diphyllous, fleshy. Flowers
numerous; staminal scales deeply 2-fid. Fruit deeply 5-lobed, turbinate.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Soturba).


119 =Fagonia cretica= _Linn._ ABU-SHOKA, ABU-SHWEIKA & SHOLIB—Arab;
OSAR—Hadendowa.

Bushy, spinose, shrubby herb. Leaves opposite, 1-5 fol., nearly sessile.
Flowers solitary, usually purple or lilac. Fruit pyramidal, deeply
5-lobed.

Red Sea Prov.; Kassala Prov. (between Goz Regeb & Bir Tussun); Dongola
Prov.; Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.;
Kordofan (Taiara & Obeid); Darfur Prov. (Plains 40-80 miles N.E. of El
Fasher).

Used in native medicines for tumours, ulcers, etc.

=var. parviflora= _Boiss._

Leaves 1-fol.; leaflets linear-lanceolate. Spines exceeding the leaves.

Nubia (Otao).


120 =Seetzenia africana= _R. Br._

Prostrate herb, woody below. Leaves opposite, 3-fol., with interpetiolar
stipules, fleshy. Flowers small, axillary, solitary. Fruit of 5 1-seeded
cocci, separating longitudinally, sub-globose.

Dongola Prov. (J. Barkal).


                             =GERANIACEÆ.=


121 =Monsonia senegalensis= _Guill._ EL GURUN (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Diffuse shrubby herb with ovate-cordate leaves. Flowers purple on
1-flowered peduncles. Fruit beaked, beak 3 in. long. Stamens 15.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile Prov. (Jebelein & J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.


=M. nivea= _Webb._

Small white pubescent herb with ovate-lanceolate (not cordate) leaves.
Fruit beak 1½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab).


122 =Geranium favosum= _Hochst._

Annual, up to 4 ft. high; branches glandular, pilose above.

Leaves deeply 5-lobed, segments pinnatifid. Peduncles 2-flowered;
stamens 10. Carpels transversely deeply pitted, with or without tails.
Fruit beaked.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & 21° N.L., etc.).


123 =Erodium malachoides= _Willd._ KORĪAB—Hadendowa.

Stemless herb with decumbent branches, pubescent. Radical leaves, ovate-
cordate, more or less 3-5-lobed, crenate. Fruit beak up to 2½ in. long.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & 21° N.L.); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: 9,000
ft.)


                             =OXALIDACEÆ.=


124 =Oxalis caprina= _Linn._

Tuberous stemless herb. Leaves 3-fol. with obcordate leaflets; leaf
stalks up to 6 in. long. Flowers purplish in 3-8 flowered umbels on long
peduncles.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=O. corniculata= _Linn._

Perennial herb with long creeping or underground stems. Leaves
trifoliolate. Flowers yellow, 1-3 in umbels on axillary peduncles
exceeding the leaves.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the
Nabambisso); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Niurnya 7,000 ft.).


125 =Biophytum Apodiscias= _Turcz._

Annual; leaves abruptly pinnate, crowded at nodes and ends of stem and
branches, sensitive. Flowers, yellow or red, in umbels on axillary
peduncles, with numerous setaceous bracts. Styles 5. Fruit a 5-celled
capsule.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


                            =BALSAMINACEÆ.=


126 =Impatiens niamniamensis= _Gilg._

Herb 1 ft. high. Leaves ovate-lanceolate deeply crenate, about 6 in.
long. Flowers with the upper petal green, the spur dull purple.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Assika River).


=I. Irvingii= _Hook. f._

Succulent herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves usually alternate, lanceolate,
serrulate, 3-5 in. long. Flowers red, solitary or in pairs, irregular,
the spur of calyx much longer than the body of the lip. Capsule short,
elastically splitting into 5-valves.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Mbrwole & Yuru Rivers).


                              =LYTHRACEÆ.=


127 =Rotala verticillaris= _Linn._

Herb, often procumbent. Leaves in whorls of 4-8, narrow linear, truncate
or bifid at apex. Flowers sessile, whorled, small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=R. serpiculoides= _Welw._

Marsh herb, 1-3 in. high. Leaves opposite, linear, ab. 1 in. long.
Flowers 1-4 together; calyx 4 deltoid lobes, reddish; petals rare,
reddish; stamens 1-2: capsules 3-valved, reddish.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=R. decussata= _Hiern._

Marsh herb, 1-9 in. high. Leaves decussate, oblong, ½ in. long. Flowers
sessile, solitary; calyx 4-lobed; petals 4 or 0; capsule 3-valved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land; between Ngama & Dokuttu).


=R. stagnina= _Hiern._

Erect marsh herb 4 in. high. Leaves opposite, ovate-oblong, 2 in. long.
Flowers 4-merous, sessile; petals 0 or caducous; stamens 2; capsules
3-valved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


=R. tenella= _Schwfth._

Creeping marsh herb. Leaves sessile, amplexicaul. Flowers minute, white;
capsule globose, 4-valved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land: Gir).


128 =Woodfordia floribunda= _Salisb._

Shrub with spreading branches. Leaves opposite, sometimes in whorls of
3, sessile, ovate-lanceolate, cordate or rounded at base. Flowers in
axillary clusters; calyx tubular, scarlet; petals minute.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Khor Mashisha, near Dilling);
Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, 5-6,500 ft.).

It exudes a gum said to be like Gum Tragacanth. The flowers are used as
a dye. Both flowers and leaves contain tannin.


129 =Nesæa heptamera= _Hiern._

Small herb with red heptamerous, minute flowers. Leaves opposite,
linear-lanceolate, about 1 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Pongo River).


=N. erecta= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Small herb on river banks, up to 10 in. high. Leaves opposite, linear ¾
in. long. Flowers magenta or purple: petals 4-6.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor); Uganda (Nile Province).


=N. cordata= _Hiern._

Riverside herb, up to 9 in. high. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, cordate at
base, ½ in. long. Flowers in heads of 5 surrounded by 2 cordate bracts;
petals pink.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur. Ghattas & Bongo-land: Gir); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi Swamps).


130 =Ammannia senegalensis= _Lam._ TAMR EL FAR (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Erect, branched herb with 4-winged stem. Flowers axillary, pink,
4-merous. Leaves linear-oblong to lanceolate, auricled, amplexicaul,
2-in. long, opposite.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (near Abba
Island, J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Darfur Prov.
(Zalingei: Wadi Azum).

The plant is used as a blistering agent.


=A. baccifera= _Linn._

Erect herb with 4-angled stem. Leaves opposite, linear-lanceolate, 2 in.
long. Cymes 3-7. Flowers sub-sessile, axillary; calyx 4-lobed; petals 4
or 0; stamens 4; capsule globular, dehiscing transversely about the
middle.

Dongola Prov. (between Dongola & Korti); between Khartoum & Shendi;
Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).

The leaves are used for blistering, but the effect is said to be most
painful.


=A. salicifolia= _Monti in Comment._

Marsh herb, 18 in. high, with 4-angled stem. Leaves opposite,
lanceolate. Flower small, in dense cymes, whorled, 4-9 in each axil.
Capsule 1-celled.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); between Khartoum & Shendi).


=A. urceolata= _Hiern._

Erect annual with 4-angled stem. Leaves opposite, linear, ½ to 2 in.
long. Flowers in dense axillary clusters, 6 in each axil. Capsule
1-celled.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


131 =Lawsonia alba= _Lam._ HENNA—Arab.

Glabrous shrub; branches angular, sometimes spinescent. Leaves opposite,
nearly sessile, elliptic, ab. 1 in. long. Flowers in long axillary or
terminal panicles, small, greenish yellow, smell like mignonette.

Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper
White Nile Prov. (Sobat River, Tawfikia). Introduced.

The leaves are used to dye the finger nails and the palms of the hands
an orange colour. The seeds yield an oil.


                              =PUNICACEÆ.=


132 =Punica granatum= _Linn._ RUMMĀN—Arab. The Pomegranate.

Shrub or small tree with large scarlet flowers. Fruit size of an orange;
seeds surrounded by a pink, edible pulp.

Introduced from Asia.


                              =ONAGRACEÆ.=


133 =Jussieua diffusa= _Forsk._

Procumbent aquatic herb, usually supplied with pale pinkish spindle-
shaped floats. Leaves alternate, linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, narrow
at base. Flowers yellow; calyx 5-lobed, enlarged in fruit; pet. 5;
stamens 10.

White Nile, Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.


=J. pilosa= _H. B._ & _K._ ARKALA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; LŪNG (Meshra
El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Differs little from _J. diffusa_ Forsk. except by its erect habit and
more hirsute young parts.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.;
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=J. acuminata= _Sw._

Stems glabrous. Leaves lanceolate subacute, 3-4 in. long, ½-1 in. broad,
glabrous or nearly so, pinnately several nerved. Fruits wrinkled, 1 in.
long.

Khartoum Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Linduku
Stream); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=J. villosa= _Lam._

Erect herb, 4 ft. high; stem woody, somewhat winged, hairy above. Leaves
alternate, linear to lanceolate, ½ to 5 in. long. Flowers 4-merous,
solitary, yellow, sessile, small. Capsule up to 2 in. long.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=J. villosa= _Lam._ =var. linearis= _Jacq._

Erect, hirsute herb. Leaves narrow linear; fibres of old capsules
persistent.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).


=J. linifolia= _Vahl._ SOFSAF (N. Kordn.) & TOTO—Arab.

Erect herb, 2 ft. or more; stem narrowly winged. Leaves linear-
lanceolate 1-3 in. long. Flowers small, yellow, 4-merous, sessile,
axillary. Capsule cylindrical, 2/3 in. long.

Khartoum to Berber (banks of the Nile); Atbara; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung
Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


134 =Ludwigia jussioides= _Lam._

Erect herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves linear-oval to lanceolate, 1½-4 in.
long, alternate. Flowers axillary, yellow, up to 1 in. in diam.;
4-5-merous. Capsules 1 in. long and 1/12 in. diam.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=L. parviflora= _Roxb._

Erect annual, 6-18 in.; stem often angular. Leaves linear-lanceolate to
lanceolate, tapering to base, ab. 1½ in. long. Flowers tetramerous,
yellow. Capsule under ½ in. long, cylindrical, somewhat inflated,
4-veined.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai).


135 =Trapa bispinosa= _Roxb._ CHUWALAGEIR (Kenissa)—Dinka. Water
Chestnut.

Aquatic herb; stems ascending in water, giving off numerous pectinate
roots. Leaves alternate, floating petioles dilated into floats; blades
triangular, broadly dentate on upper edges. Fruit ab. 1 in. long,
shield-shaped, armed with 2 curved, barbed spines.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Main River); Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).

Although it is not known in the Sudan as edible the fruit is much used
in India as an article of food and is eaten raw or cooked.


136 =Epilobium hirsutum= _Linn._

Erect herb, hirsute, 2-5 ft. high. Leaves opposite, linear-lanceolate,
serrulate, amplexicaul, 1-5 in. long. Flowers sessile, axillary,
solitary; calyx tube narrow, elongate, 4-lobed; petals 4, pink or
purple; stamens 8; stigma 4-lobed. Capsule 2-3 in. long.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra).


                            =HALORRHAGACEÆ.=


137 =Laurembergia Engleri= _Schindler._

Low herb in swamps with reddish glabrous stems and alternate linear
obtuse leaves scarcely ½ in. long. Flowers minute, sessile, axillary.
Fruits muricate.

Bahr El Ghazal (Jur Ghattas).


                             =THYMELÆACEÆ.=


138 =Gnidia Mittuorum= _Gilg._

Heather-like undershrub, 4-12 in. high; stems 4-angled. Leaves oblong or
obl.-obovate, ½-1 in. long. Heads terminal, 7-10 flowered; involucral
bracts 3-4, ovate, ¼ in. long. Flowers brownish-yellow; pedicels minute,
bearing a tuft of white hairs; calyx under ½ in. long; lobes 4, minute;
petals 4 inserted on calyx tube, scale-like; stamens 8, sessile in
calyx-tube, _in 2 rows_.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Deim Adlan, Mittu: Deragoh).


=G. Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Glabrous herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves scattered, lanceolate or oblong, ½-1
in. long. Flowers yellowish-brown in terminal heads of 15-25 fl., or in
axillary 1-3 headed racemes; invol. bracts 4-5, ovate; calyx smaller
than above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi).


=G. apiculata= _Gilg._

Undershrub, 1½-3 ft. high. Leaves alternate, crowded, linear or narrowly
elliptic, ½-2/3 in. long. Heads numerous, terminal, peduncled and
lateral ones sessile, 10-15 flowered; invol. bracts 7-14 in 2 rows;
calyx tube pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumango hills); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi).


139 =Lasiosiphon Kraussii= _Meisn._ BURURU—Golo.

Woody herb, 4-24 in. high. Leaves opposite, elliptic, lanceolate or
narrow-ovate, ½-2 in. long. Heads solitary, terminal, many flowered;
peduncles 1-4 in., velvety; invol. bracts 6-10, hairy; calyx yellow,
hairy below, pubescent above, ½ in. long, 5-lobed; petals minute, scale-
like; stamens 10, _in 2 rows_.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Heiban); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 6,000-9,500 ft.); Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: between Kutshook Ali’s Zariba & the River Wau,
between Pongo River & Jur, Dar Fertit, Golo Desert).

The crushed roots are used for poisoning fish. It is also a virulent
poison to man and animals.


140 =Arthrosolen chrysantha= _Solms-Laub._

Virgate, bushy, or heather-like undershrub, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves
scattered, linear, ¾ in. long. Heads terminal, solitary, many-flowered;
invol. bracts ovate to linear; pedicel with ring of hairs; calyx tube ½
in. long; lobes 4; petals 0; stamens 8 _in 2 rows_.

Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


141 =Dicranolepis Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves alternate, oblong or obl.-lanceolate,
caudate-acuminate, 2-3 in. long, with yellow-brown hairs beneath.
Flowers solitary, sessile, 1 in. long; calyx tube slender, lobes 5, ⅙
in. long; pet. 5, scale-like, forked; stamens 10, _in 2 whorls_. Drupe
oval, ½ in. long.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: River Diagbe at Wando).


=D. cerasifera= _Gilg._

Shrub. Leaves variable, ovate to lanceolate, acute or acuminate, 1-2½
in. long, hairy beneath. Flowers 1-2 together, not seen. Drupe smaller
than a cherry, reddish.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by Diamwonu River).


                            =NYCTAGINACEÆ.=


142 =Boerhaavia elegans= _Choisy._

Tall branched herb. Leaves opposite, petioled, broadly ovate, 1½ in.
long, whitish beneath. Flowers in lax, terminal, slender panicles,
usually solitary, rarely 2-3-nate on the rachis; perianth tube
cylindric, lower part persistent 5-angled, viscid ⅙ in. long, enclosing
the fruit, upper part petaloid, shortly 5-lobed; stamens 2, exserted,
connate at base.

Coast of Nubia.


=B. adscendens= _Willd._

Glabrous herb 2-3 ft. high. Leaves opposite, ovate-oblong or rotundate,
up to 2 in. long, pet. 1 in. Panicles terminal, 9 in. long. Flowers
umbelled, 4-9 at ends of panicle; perianth minute; fr. under ⅛ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Sobat.


=B. repens= _Linn._ RIGLA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; TEB (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka.

Glabrous creeping or scrambling herb. Leaves in unequal pairs at the
nodes, ovate or lanceolate, ab. 1 in. long. Peduncles axillary bearing
4-10 flowered umbels; per. minute, 5-ribbed, glandular between the ribs;
lobes pinkish; fr. minute; stamens 1-3.

Red Sea Prov. (between Suakin & Berber: Wadi Abu Salem, Suakin, Erkowit,
El Galabeheb & Khor Ashat); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Kordofan Prov.
(Abu Gerad & Bara); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Darfur Prov. (Kulme);
Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).

=var. diffusa= _Hook. f._ TERBA (N. Kordn.), LADUA (White Nile) &
MUDDEYD (Egypt)—Arab.

More pubescent. Leaves ovate or ovate-rotundate; fr.-perianth less
glandular.

Wadi Halfa; Khartoum Prov. (J. Royan); Blue Nile Prov.; Fung. Prov.
(Fazoghli); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid,
Abu Haraza, Bara); Darfur Prov.; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).

The plant is eaten by the Sontals in India as a pot-herb. The root is
used in infusion, or given in powder, and has laxative, diuretic and
cooling properties. It has been prescribed for asthma with success.
Taken in large doses it acts as an emetic. The plant is much used, in
external applications, for dropsical swellings.

=var. viscosa= _Choisy._

More robust than type; stems and leaves densely glandular, hairy. Leaves
ovate or subrotundate, sinuate, up to 1¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Soturba & 21° L.N.); Kordofan Prov.


=B. verticillata= _Poir._ SHINEMAQ (Blue Nile)—Arab.

Tall, much-branched, glabrous herb. Leaves broadly ovate, 2 in. long.
Panicles of 3-5 flowered whorls and terminal umbels; per. minute,
stalked glands at base; stamens 2.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba; Sea-coast about 21° L.N., Wadi Surrawib; Wadi El
Omari; Sinkat); Fung Prov. (Singa); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov. (Bir Sodari).


=B. plumbaginea= _Cav._ ABU LEBBEN—Arab.

Scrambling or procumbent herb. Leaves broadly ovate, petioled. Flowers
arranged as above; per. white or lilac up to ⅓ in. long in upper part,
funnel-shaped, lower ⅓ in. long in fr. with 10 large glandular disks
near apex.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, Khor Tamanib & Erkowit); Khartoum Prov.; Fung
Prov. (Roseires); White Nile Prov. (12° 10 N.L.).

A decoction of the root is used for jaundice.


=B. pentandra= _Burch._ ERG EL TUEIRĀT (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Procumbent herb. Leaves large, cordate-ovate, serrate. Whorls in large
lateral and terminal panicles; bracts lanceolate, ½ in. long; pedicels ½
in. long; per. upper part funnel-shaped, ⅛ in. long, base ⅓ in. with
many glandular disks at top; stamens 3.

Kassala Prov. (between Kassala & Goz Regeb); Blue Nile Prov. Ganeib
Assad); Kordofan Prov. (Bara).


                              =PROTEACEÆ.=


143 =Protea abyssinica= _Willd._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves alternate, lanceolate or lanc. oblong, 6 in.
long, coriaceous. Flowers in terminal turbinate heads surrounded by
densely imbricate silvery and silky bracts, outermost minute, increasing
inwards, innermost oblong, 1½ in. long; per. ¾ in. long, tubular,
compressed, 2-tipped, fulvous hairy in upper half; stamens 4; anthers
subsessile, ¼ in. long; nut hairy.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); W. Abyssinia (Baro, Sobat District &
Blue Nile).


=P. madiensis= _Oliv._

Shrub or small tree; bark red-brown. Leaves lanc.-elliptic, 6-8 in.
long, coriaceous, hairy both sides. Heads somewhat sunflower-like, up to
4 in. across; bracts glabrescent, outer ¼ in. long ovate, inner up to 3
in. long, pinkish; per. 2 in. long, yellow.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo; Sabbi, Niamniam: Tuhami’s Zariba, Biri
River near Deim Zubeir: Swei River & Gumango River).


                             =DILLENIACEÆ.=


144 =Tetracera alnifolia= _Willd._

Climbing shrub. Leaves broad-elliptical or obovate-elliptical, entire or
obscurely denticulate. Flowers paniculate, white ⅓ to 2/3 in. in diam.;
sepals glabrous within.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: near Kuddu by the Roali River).

The stems when cut transversely yield a supply of potable fluid.


=T. strigillosa= _Gilg._

Undershrub, about 2 ft. high from a woody rhizome. Leaves oblanceolate,
dentate. Flowers white, very few together; sepals glabrous inside;
petals emarginate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near River Biri, and also Niamniam-land: by the
Ibba River, Nganye).


                            =PITTOSPORACEÆ.=


145 =Pittosporum abyssinicum= _Del._

Shrub or tree. Leaves coriaceous oblanceolate, at first rusty tomentose.
Flowers ¼ to ⅓ in. long in umbellate clusters in dense terminal
corymbose panicles. Sepals rusty tomentose. Ovary pilose. Capsule
globose under ½ in. diam.

White Nile.


                               =BIXACEÆ.=


146 =Bixa Orellana= _Linn._

Shrub. Leaves oblong lanceolate to ovate oblong. Flowers in terminal
racemes, pink, large. Fruit covered by a mass of red-brown soft
prickles, oblong.

Mongalla Prov. (Kagulu); Congo. Introduced and cultivated.

The source of Annatto.


                           =COCHLOSPERMACEÆ.=


147 =Cochlospermum niloticum= _Oliv._ AKIT—Jur.

Usually a woody dwarf-plant, but occasionally up to 3 ft. high. In the
dwarf plants the large, solitary yellow flowers are seen just above the
ground. Leaves palmate; seeds covered with cottony hair.

Southern Kordofan Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Deim
Zubeir, between Wau & Chakchak & Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Bari &
Madi countries); Nuba Mts. Prov. (near Talodi).

The swollen subterranean portion is used medicinally in Nuba Mountains
Province, _i.e._, chewed as a tonic, etc.


                            =FLACOURTIACEÆ.=


148 =Oncoba spinosa= _Forsk._ ALDUKOI (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka;
AKALAKWALA—Jur.

Spiny shrub with showy white flowers; spines up to 2 in. long. Leaves
subcoriaceous, elliptical, short, acuminate, crenate-serrate or
serrulate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

The fruit is the size of a Tangerine Orange, and is used by the Dinkas
to make a kind of rattle.


149 =Caloncoba Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Tree up to 30 ft. Leaves ovate-elliptic, rounded at the base, about 5
in. long. Flowers large and showy; petals 1¾ in. long. Fruit 1½ in.
diam., apiculate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: at Teh & Niamniam-land: by the
Nabambisso River).


150 =Lindukeria dentata= _Oliv._

Shrub or small tree, up to 30 ft. high, glabrous. Leaves membranous,
oblong-elliptic to elliptic, dentate-serrate, 3-10 in. long. Flowers up
to ¾ in. diam., in loose axillary racemes, 1-3 in. long. Sepals 3;
petals 6-10. Fruit globose, with spreading spines, about ½ in. in diam.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Wando).


=L. Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Shrub. Leaves oblanceolate, acuminate, serrate, 6-7 cm. long. Flowers
few and very small in axillary cymes. Fruits small and echinate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Linduku River).


151 =Flacourtia sp.=

Shrub. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, crenate, sub-mucronate to obtuse.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


                              =SAMYDACEÆ.=


152 =Casearia Engleri= _Gilg._

A tree. Leaves oblong-elliptic, rounded at base, shortly acuminate,
about 6 in. long and 2½ in. wide, glabrous. Flowers small in axillary
fascicles. Fruits like coffee berries, yellowish white, about ½ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land, Sine loc. Schwfth. III. 241).


153 =Homalium Abdessamadi= _Asch._ & _Schwfth._

Tree, 40 ft. high. Leaves 3 in. long by 2 in. broad, crenate-dentate,
broadly elliptic, alder-like. Flowers paniculate, branches of panicle
catkin-like. Fruits pilose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (by the Ibba River, near Nganye).


                            =FRANKENIACEÆ.=


154 =Frankenia pulverulenta= _Linn._ EIRARIB—Hadendowa.

Small diffuse herb. Leaves opposite, often fascicled, obovate, oval or
rotundate. Flowers rose to purple, sessile, solitary in the forks or
fascicled in leafy heads or cymes. Calyx tubular 4-6 toothed; petals
4-6; stamens 6; ovary 1-celled.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Gwob, Erkowit).


                             =TAMARICACEÆ.=


155 =Tamarix mannifera= _Ehrb._

Coastal tree or shrub. Leaves scale-like, encircling the stem, subacute.
Flowers in dense spikes. Seeds long-pilose.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.).


=T. nilotica= _Ehrb._ TARFA—Arab.

Riverside shrub with scale-like leaves and slender erect branches.
Flowers white or pinkish-white, crowded in spicate panicles at the ends
of branches.

Northern Sudan, Red Sea Prov.; Kassala Prov., etc.


=T. articulata= _Vahl._ FAREQ (Nubia), ABL (Egypt), TARFA (Sudan)—Arab;
ERU—Hameg.

Tree with feathery foliage; branchlets articulate. Leaves minute,
sheathing. Flowers loosely scattered on long slender spikes.

Red Sea Prov. (Baraka, Dongonab); Kassala Prov. (Gash); Fung Prov.

Wood white, moderately hard, when burnt green gives an offensive smell.
Galls, called BIGM by Arabs, are used for dyeing and tanning.


                            =PASSIFLORACEÆ.=


156 =Adenia venenata= _Forsk._ KUDUR—Arab; LORING—Bari; KUDUL—Jur.

Soft woody climber; the lower part of the stem is often inflated and
tuberous in appearance, up to over 1 ft. in diameter. Leaves alternate,
palmately 5-lobed. Flowers cream coloured; unisexual; calyx tubular,
5-lobed; petals 5.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat); Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El
Rek), also Jur-land & Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé).


=A. sp. Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Climber; leaves ovate, 4 in. long, rounded and with 2 very large glands
at the base. Flowers in short lateral cymes. Calyx tubular, ⅓ in. long;
lobes lanceolate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land; by the Boddoh River).


=A. sp.=

Climber; leaves linear-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, up to 6
in. long and 1¼ in. broad, minutely dotted below. Flowers ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Schwfth. III 109 & III 111).


=A. sp.=

Soft, slender stemmed climber. Leaves digitately 5-lobed, nearly 2 in.
long, very thin, lobes lanceolate, subacute, minutely pubescent below.
Flowers not seen. Fruits stipitate, narrowly ellipsoid, about 1.5 cm.
long, with the persistent hairy calyx at the base.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


                            =CUCURBITACEÆ.=


157 =Peponia Cienkowskii= _Hook. f._

Prostrate or climbing herb; tendrils simple or divided. Leaves ovate,
cordate, 5-7 lobed, 3 in. broad. Flowers monœcious; calyx tube ⅓ in.
long; petals large, white or yellowish; filaments 3, free, anthers
cohering, one 1-celled and two 2-celled, conduplicate; stigma 3-partite.
Fruit ovoid or cylindric, fleshy.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


158 =Trochomeria djurensis= _Schwfth._

A slender climbing herb. Leaves more or less pentagonal and 5-lobulate,
acute, widely cordate, scabrid; tendrils short. Male flowers with
tubular calyx 1 cm. long, and minute lobes. Corolla-lobes linear-
lanceolate, 2-3 cm. long; female flowers very small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


159 =Adenopus breviflorus= _Benth._

Herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves palmately 5-lobed,
apiculate. Flowers yellow, 1½ to 2 in. across; male flower: stamens 3,
monadelphous. Fruit ovoid, mottled green when young, scarlet when ripe,
size of a large egg.

Blue Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Melut); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land: by the Yabo River).


160 =Lagenaria vulgaris= _Seringe._

Musk-scented climbing herbs; tendrils forked. Leaves orbicular-cordate,
more or less 3-7 lobed, toothed, 1-6 in. broad. Male flower solitary 2-5
in. diameter, white; filaments 3, free; anthers flexuous, cohering.
Female flower smaller. Fruit woody.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.); Between Berber & Khartoum.


161 =Luffa cylindrica= _Linn._ LUFA—Arab.

Semi-woody climber; tendrils forked. Leaves palmately 5-7 lobed,
denticulate. Flowers yellow, about 2 in. across. Anthers in male flower
much twisted and divided; filaments dilated at the base. Fruit mottled
green when young, brown when ripe, with a dehiscing cap.

Khartoum Prov. (Cultivated); White Nile Prov. (12° N. Lat.); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (wild).

Fruit called LIF in Arabic, when wild about 6 in. long; when cultivated
up to 18 in. long. The fibrous, spongy substance which fills the fruit
is used as a substitute for a sponge or brush, also for inside soles of
shoes and the manufacture of sun helmets. The pulp is edible; an oil is
obtained from the seeds, which are also emetic and cathartic.


=L. echinata= _Roxb._ WASSI, ARSH & UMSHWEIKA (White Nile)—Arab.

Herbaceous climber; tendrils forked. Leaves orbicular-reniform, 2-4 in.
broad, scabrid, shallow-toothed. Flowers yellow, 1 in. diameter. Male
flower anthers 3 flexuous; female flower 1-3 together. Fruit 1 in. long
echinate.

Berber Prov. (Zeidab); Blue Nile Prov. (Abu Haraz); Fung Prov.; White
Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Upper White Nile Prov. (Bahr El Zeraf), Red
Sea Prov. (Khor Gateb).

The fruit is said to have purgative properties and to be a remedy for
dropsy. A mixture of the spongy tissue of the fruit and of milk (known
by the Sudanese as “Wassi purgative”) is taken by barren women to
stimulate pregnancy.


162 =Eureiandra Schweinfurthii= _Cogn._

Herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves deeply trilobed, about 3 in.
broad, scabrid. Stamens 5, much twisted. Fruit narrowly, 2 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


163 =Momordica pterocarpa= _Hochst._

Climbing herb. Leaves digitate, 5-fol.; leaflets ovate-lanceolate,
obliquely cordate, 2-4 in. long. Male flowers crowded at end of a
peduncle with a hooded green bract ¾ in. long; corolla yellow, 1 in.
diameter; anthers 3, cells nearly straight. Female flower solitary,
ebracteate. Fruit 2-3 in. long, ovoid, pointed, with 8-10 short wings,
red when ripe.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=M. Balsamina= _Pinn._ (EL) SHA’ALUK & (EL) YEIR (Blue Nile), (EL) ERRA
(N. Kordn.) & BEYLÄSĀN (Egypt), TAMR EL ABID—Arab.

Herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves palmate, 3-5 lobed. Flowers
monœcious; male flower solitary on bracteate peduncle, yellow or white,
centre black, anthers flexuous. Fruit fleshy, beaked, red when ripe, 1-3
in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat & Karora); Blue Nile, Fung, Darfur & Kordofan
Provinces.

The fruit is eaten, especially by the Fellata. In Syria it is used for
curing wounds. The leaves are cooked and eaten; they are said also to be
good camel fodder.


=M. Charantia= _Linn._

Herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves palmately 7-9-fid, cordate.
Flowers yellow, monœcious, on long, slender peduncles, with a reniform
bract near the base. Fruit about 1½ in. long, ovoid-fusiform, with
longitudinal tubercled lines, with a decurved beak, orange when ripe;
seeds enclosed in scarlet pulp.

Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=M. Schimperiana= _Naudin._

Herbaceous climber. Leaves ovate, cordate, dentate. Fruit size of an
egg, covered with soft bristles, scarlet when ripe.

Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=M. Morkorra= _A. Rich._

Glabrous or pubescent climber. Leaves ovate, cordate, 3-5 in. long;
tendrils simple. Flowers monœcious; corolla rotate, yellow, 2 in. broad.
Fruit ovoid, red when ripe, densely hairy, 1-2 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Roseires & Fazoghli); White Nile
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas and Niamniam-land, by the
Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).


=M. multiflora= _Hook. f._

Slender climber. Leaves ovate, cordate, faintly sinuate-toothed, 2-6 in.
long; tendrils simple or forked. Male flowers many on solitary or paired
peduncles, hairy; corolla ¾ in. diameter; yellow; anthers 3, cells
curved. Fr. ovoid, red, crowned with dried flower.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=M. Cymbalaria= _Fenzl._

Climber with woody, tuberous root. Leaves orbicular-reniform, 1-2 in.
broad, fleshy, 5-7 lobed; tendrils simple. Male flower racemose, hairy;
corolla 5-lobed, ½ in. diameter, yellow; filaments 2, one 2- and one
3-cleft; cells twisted. Fr. spindle-shaped, 8-ribbed, greenish.

Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Mongalla Prov.

The tubers are used to procure abortion.


164 =Cucumis Melo= _Linn._ AGUR or AJUR (N. Kordn., Wild form), FAGUS
(Sweet Senat), AJUR (Bitter Senat), also SENAT, SENAT-TIBISH, & SENAT
AJUR (Kordn.), AJUR EL KELB (Meshra El Zeraf) & SHAMMAM—Arab The Sweet
Melon.

Prostrate or climbing, prickly herb. Leaves cordate, reniform or ovate,
3-5 lobed, irregularly toothed, scabrid, ½ to 1 in. long. Male flower
fascicled 1 to many, small, yellow; anthers 3, cells twisted, connective
produced, oblong, serrate. Fruit ovoid-globose, greenish-yellow.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Abu Selem); Berber Prov. (Zeidab); Kassala
Prov. (Gallabat); Khartoum, Fung, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.
Cultivated and also wild.


=C. Figarei= _Del._

Trailing and climbing herb; tendrils simple. Leaves scabrid, 5-7 deeply
lobed, toothed, 1-2 in. diameter. Flowers hairy, yellow, small. Fruit
broad ovoid, covered with blunt tubercles.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Omareg); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White
Nile Prov. (J. Nyemati, Jebelein); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid & Mulbes); Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi, Shambe); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=C. Prophetarum= _Linn._ HABASHKOL (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Annual climber with stiff, rough hairs. Leaves 3-5 lobed, 1¼ in. broad.
Male flower yellow, hairy; anthers 3, appendaged. Fruit broad ovoid;
green, with pale longitudinal bands, covered with soft spines, 1½ in.
long.

Red Sea Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan & Mongalla
Provinces.

The fruit is bitter and is used as an emetic.


=C. dipsaceus= _Ehrenb._ AJUR EL GHAZAL (Meshra El Zeraf) & AJUR—Arab;
APET (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka; ABDALOUR—Jur; ABERTGH (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Shilluk.

Slender herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves rounded or oblong-
reniform, entire or shallowly 3-5 lobed; scabrid, 2-4 in. broad;
petioles bristly. Male flower hairy; anthers appendaged. Fr. broadly
ovoid, ½ in. long, densely bristly.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Dongola Prov. (Old Dongola to Merowe);
Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Dinder mouth); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Meginas); Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=C. sativus= _Linn._ KHIAR—Arab. The Cucumber.

Climbing herb, stem hispid. Leaves 3-5 lobed. Fruit fusiform-oblong,
green, tubercled.

Cultivated everywhere.


=C. metuliferus= _E. Mey._

Herbaceous climber. Leaves palmately 3-5 lobed, toothed, stiffly
pubescent, 2-4 in. diameter each way. Male flower: anthers 3-appendaged.
Fruit long, ovoid, 3-5 in. long, with scattered stout conical prickles,
orange when ripe.

Blue Nile & Mongalla Provinces. Cultivated.


=C. Pepo= _DC._ ARAA or GARAA KOSSA—Arab.

Prostrate herb. Leaves deeply 5-lobed. Petioles and leaf-nerves prickly.
Fruit oblong, large.

Cultivated. Vegetable Marrow.


165 =Bryonopsis laciniosa= _Linn._

Slender climber; tendrils forked. Leaves 5-7 in. broad, 5-7 lobed,
cordate, scabrid, serrate. Male and female flowers in the same leaf
axil; corolla campanulate, small, yellow; stamens 3, anthers cohering,
flexuous. Fruit globose, 1 in. diameter, green, striped with yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.).


166 =Mukia scabrella= _Arn._

Hispid herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves cordate, almost
triangular. Flowers monœcious, small, yellow, male and female together
in axillary clusters. Fruit almost globose, with a few scattered hairs,
½ in. diameter, scarlet.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Between Suakin & Berber (Gireshab); Upper
White Nile Prov. (opposite Tonga Mission); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).

Used medicinally on the West Coast as an aperient and sudorific, and
also for flatulency.


167 =Zehneria cordifolia= _Schwfth._

Slender climber. Leaves cordate or triangular-cordate, 1½-2 in.
diameter. Male and female flowers in the same axil. Flowers white. Fruit
a berry, ¼ in. diameter, globose.

Bahr El Jebel (Sudd); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Mbomu, near
the Lesi R.).


168 =Melothria deltoidea= _Benth._

Slender trailing or climbing plant. Leaves triangular-hastate. Flowers
white, monœcious; anthers distinct; fruit almost fusiform. Tendrils
simple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé); Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).


=M. tridactyla= _Hook. f._

Very slender thread-like branches. Leaves deltoid, very thin, 2 in. long
and broad, scabrid-warted on both sides; tendrils thread-like. Flowers
very small, on slender racemes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Boddo River, 3729 Schwfth).


169 =Kedrostis foetidissima= _Cogn._ SHA’ALUK—Arab.

Herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves broadly ovate, cordate, 1-3
in. Flowers small, male in slender racemes, female solitary, monœcious.
Fruit fœtid, rugose, beaked, orange coloured when ripe.

Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Dinka-land, Djuiho).

The root is used for curing piles and asthma. The berry is used as cure
for sore throat, also when pounded up is given to sick cattle. The stem
is dried and pounded and used for mixing with snuff.


=K. sp.=

Small climber with yellow flowers.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok).


170 =Corallocarpus Fenzlii= _Hook. f._

Prostrate herb. Leaves orbicular, 3-5 lobed, 3-4 in. diameter. Fruit
ovoid, long beaked, fleshy, scarlet.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=C. erostris= _Hook. f._

Prostrate herb. Leaves orbicular, obtusely 5-angled. Fruit hardly or not
at all beaked, scarlet.

Nubian Coast; Red Sea Prov. (Wadi Soturba).


=C. Gijef= _Hook. f._

Prostrate; stem woody. Leaves scabrid, reniform, ovate, ¾ in. diameter,
3-lobed, distantly toothed, scabrid-glandular; tendrils stout, corky,
white. Flowers small, greenish-yellow. Fruit very short beaked, scarlet.

Sudan North (Between Berber & Red Sea, in Wadis); Kassala Prov. (J.
Kirureb); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Kaija Nuba).


=C. Ehrenbergii= _Hook. f._

Prostrate. Leaves deeply 3-5 lobed. Fruit beak slender, ½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin).


=C. etbaicus= _Hook. f._

Prostrate; stem angular. Leaves 3-5 lobed, 1-2 in. diameter, ashy grey.
Fruit short-beaked, ½-⅔ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba).


171 =Ctenolepis fimbristipula= _K._ & _P._

Herbaceous climber; tendrils simple. Leaves deeply 5-lobed. Fruit size
of a cherry, when ripe red, with white markings. Stipular bracts, broad,
fringed.

Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kassala Prov.
(Gallabat); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid & Mulbes); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


172 =Citrullus vulgaris= _Schrad._ BATTIKH—Arab. The Watermelon.

Climbing or trailing herb; tendrils 2-3-fid. Leaves glabrous or slightly
hairy, palmately 3 or 7-lobed; lobes pinnatifid. Fruit globular, up to
size of a man’s head, green.

Cultivated everywhere on river banks and sandbanks.

The natives of the Bahr El Ghazal Prov. grow amongst their rain crops an
inedible variety called KOREISH BATTIKH (Arab) or DITIRA (Zande), and
extract an edible oil from the seeds.


=C. Colocynthis= _Schrad._ HANDAL—Arab; DUAB—Nuer.

Climbing, or more usually, prostrate herb. Leaves much as above, but
scabrid on both surfaces. Fruit globose, the size of a cricket ball,
intensely bitter.

North Sudan.

The Colocynth Fruit, or Bitter Apple of Commerce. The pulp is extracted
and exported, it possesses powerful cathartic properties and is widely
used in medicine. In the Sudan a tar is obtained from the fruit with
which water bags are dressed in order to prevent camels from tearing
them open. The powdered pulp, either alone or mixed with Black Pepper,
is used as a preventative against the Clothes Moth.


173 =Cephalandra indica= _Naud._

Climbing perennial; tendrils simple; stem angular and grooved. Leaves
usually broad cordate-ovate, more or less deeply 5-lobed, glabrous.
Flowers diœcious, solitary, axillary; stamens 3, anthers connate. Fruit
ovoid-oblong, slightly beaked, scarlet.

Red Sea Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Mongalla
Prov. (Sheikh Tombé & Mongalla).

The scarlet, oblong fruit, is eaten both raw or cooked. The juice of the
tap-root is used for diabetes.


=C. Moghadd= _Aschers._ MUGHAD—Arab.

Climbing. Leaves pentagonal or sub-5-lobed to nearly the middle,
dentate, with glandular teeth, very acute, up to 4½ in. long, closely
scabrid-warted all over; tendrils slender, undivided. Flowers fairly
large, with spreading gamopetalous corolla. Fruits oblong, fibrous, 2½
in. long.

White Nile Prov.


=C. quinqueloba= _Schrad._ MUGHAD (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Prostrate or climbing herb; tendrils simple. Leaves deeply 5-lobed, 3-5
in. broad, with glands at base of nerves. Flowers diœcious. Male flower
solitary or subcymose; stamens 3; anthers connate, twisted. Female
flower solitary, white or yellow. Fruit oblong-ovoid.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Bara);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Nuer & Dinka Country); Sudd Country (Hillet El
Nuer).

Fruit edible.


=C. diversifolia= _Naud._

Prostrate or climbing herb. Leaves 1-6 in. broad, upper ovate-cordate,
acuminate, toothed; lower palmately, deeply 3-5 lobed, hispid. Male
flower, corolla broadly campanulate; stamens 3, filaments partly free.
Fruit ovoid, marbled red, white and yellow.

Between Suakin & Berber (J. Okurr); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


174 =Cucurbita maxima= _Duchesne._ ARAA- or GARAA-STAMBULI or -AASSALI
(Egypt)—Arab. Pumpkin.

Creeping herb. Leaves large, 5-lobed. Fruit large.


                              =CARICACEÆ.=


175 =Carica Papaya= _Linn._ PIPI—Zande. Paw-Paw.

Small, soft-wooded tree, showing leaf-scars on the stem. Leaves large
palmatifid. Fruit of female tree almost sessile on stem close to base of
the leaves, the size of a small melon, the orange-yellow pulp of which
is eaten.

Introduced. Cultivated in gardens.

Fruit edible, possesses a digestive principle called Papain, similar to
Pepsin, which is marketed as a drug.


                              =CACTACEÆ.=


176 =Opuntia Dillenii= _Haw._ BRITTEIN—Hadendowa.

Succulent subarborescent plants with more or less prickly, jointed stems
and branches; joints flat, obovate. Flowers from upper edge of joints,
yellow, tinged with red, 2-3 in. across. Fruit pyriform, edible when
ripe.

The Prickly Pear, cultivated and sub-wild. Originally introduced from
America.


                              =OCHNACEÆ.=


177 =Ochna Schweinfurthiana= _F. Hoffm._

A tree, 25 ft. high. Leaves oblanceolate, widely emarginate, about 3½
in. long and 1½ in. broad, serrulate, many-nerved; flowers clustered,
long-pedicellate; sepals 1 cm. long; fruits 1 cm. long, reticulate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Deragoh).


=O. ardisioides= _Webb._

Small or middle-sized tree, with coriaceous leaves; flowers in twos, on
old wood. Style 4-5-fid.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Roseires).


=O. leucophlœos= _Hochst._

Tortuous shrub. Leaves coriaceous, closely serrulate, 3-6 in. long.
Flowers 3-10 together, on old wood, yellow; anthers dehiscing by pore-
like slits.

Fung Prov.


=O. sp.=

Shrub, with dark bark; leafless at time of flowering; flowers white.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Between Wau & Deim Zubeir).


=O. sp.=

Mittu-land (Derago).


178 =Lophira alata= _Banks._ TANGA—Dinka & Jur, ZAWA—Zande.

Tree with long, glossy leaves; fruit like a shuttlecock, usually
3-winged. Flowers white or yellow, in terminal pyramidal panicles.

Mongalla Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (from Wau southwards).

The seeds yield an oil which is used in cooking, for hair oil and for
making soap. The wood is very hard and heavy (density 1.1), difficult to
work. It is dark brown in colour, and is suitable for heavy joinery and
sleepers.


179 =Ouratea Arnoldiana= _De Wild_ & _Dur._

_Gomphia Arnoldiana_ DC.

Shrub or tree. Leaves oblong-oblanceolate, acutely acuminate, about 6
in. long, 2 in. broad, with very numerous but obscure parallel nerves,
minutely and distantly toothed; flowers yellow, few in racemes, shorter
than the leaves.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Mbrwole River).


=O. densiflora= _De Wild_ & _Dur._

_Gomphia densiflora_ DC.

Shrub or tree. Leaves oblong-obovate, very shortly acuminate, about 6
in. long, 2½-3 in. broad, rather closely serrulate, with rather distant
lateral nerves; flowers in lax panicles longer than the leaves.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Linduku Stream).


180 =Sauvagesia erecta= _Linn._

Small herb. Leaves lanceolate or oblong, serrulate; stipules persistent,
pectinate-ciliate. Flowers small, white, rose or violet; fertile stamens
5; staminodes in two rows, inner of 5 petaloid, and outer of numerous
capitate hairs. Capsule 3-valved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dokuttu: Bongo-land, to Congo).

The plant is very mucilaginous.


                           =DIPTEROCARPACEÆ.=


181 =Monotes Kerstingii= _Gilg._ MELLA—Dinka.

Small tree; fruit surrounded by the enlarged ring-like sepals. Leaves
elliptic, rounded at both ends, with about 12 pairs of lateral nerves,
softly white tomentose below, about 4 in. by 2¾ in.; flowers small, in
axillary cymes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: East of Tonj, Bongo-land & Dar Fertit).


                              =MYRTACEÆ.=


182 =Syzygium guineense= _DC._ KORONGO, AGUA or AGUD—Golo; KULOH or
KULA—Jur; SANAMBIRI—Zande.

Two types: (a) A large tree with heavy foliage. Leaves ovate-oblong,
short-acuminate. Flowers pale yellow, fragrant. (b) Small tree with
ovate or obovate leaves. Flowers white.

Fung Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 4-8,000 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal &
Mongalla Provinces: Jur-land & Mittu-land: Kuragera.

A good timber tree; wood red, hard, even-grained, durable; fruit a
small, purple edible berry. Leaves aromatic when bruised.


183 =Psidium pomiferum= _Don._ The Guava tree.

Shrub or small tree. Leaves opposite, oblong or elliptic-oblong.
Peduncles axillary, about 1½ in. long, with 1-3 flowers; flowers white.
Fruit oblong, size of a small lemon, strongly aromatic when ripe.

Introduced from West Indies. Grown in gardens.


                           =MELASTOMATACEÆ.=


184 =Osbeckia saxicola= _Gilg._

Hispid pilose herb. Leaves linear-lanceolate, acute, up to 7 cm. long,
long setose-pilose on both surfaces. Flowers paniculate, rose. Fruits
urn-shaped, calyx deciduous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land: by Nambia Brook, near
the Kishi).


=O. senegambiensis= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Small shrub; branches 4-angled, scabrid; nodes with long-spreading
bristles. Leaves opposite, elliptic to lanceolate, with 3 parallel
nerves. Flowers ¾ in. diameter, rose or purple, usually 5-merous, in
terminal racemes; anthers 10, 2-tubercled at base. Capsule enclosed in
10-ribbed, bristly calyx-tube.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near the Pongo River between Wau & Chak-Chak).


185 =Antherotoma Naudini= _Hook. f._

Small herb, stem 4-angled. Leaves opposite, in few pairs, ovate, ½ in.
long. Flowers small, 4-merous, surrounded by a 4-leaved involucre; lobes
of calyx alternating with bristles; stamens 8-10, with connective
produced below, 2-tubercled at base, anthers opening by large pores.
Capsule membranous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai & Dar Fertit: near the Kuru
River).


186 =Dissotis petiolata= _Hook. f._

Shrub. Leaves 4-6 in. long, elliptic, with 5-parallel nerves, opposite.
Flowers solitary or 2 together, 5-merous, pink or purple, enclosed in
leafy bracts, anthers 8-10, some longer, incurved, connective produced,
as long as anther-cells. Capsule 5-valved, with a minute ring of
bristles.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=D. capitata= (_Vahl_) _Hook. f._ =var. Barteri= _Hook. f._

Small shrub, scabrid, 4-angled. Leaves 3-5 in. long, opposite, 5-7
parallel-nerved. Flowers in small bracteate heads; stamens and capsule
as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Khor Tela: between Tonj & Wau).


=D. phæotricha= _Triana._ (_Osbeckia postpluvialis_ Gilg).

Hispid herb, 6-8 in. high, 4-angled. Leaves 2 in. long, oblong with 3-5
parallel nerves. Flowers 4-merous, capitate; bracts small, pectinate,
with bristles; calyx bristly; petals purple, obovate; anthers of 2
lengths; connective short, 2-fid, shorter; stamens 2-tubercled at base.
Capsule as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: near Kulengo, Jur Ghattas).


=D. rotundifolia= ex _Gilg._ (_D. prostrata_ Triana).

Herb. Leaves ovate, 3-nerved, about 1¼ in. long, ¾ in. broad, slightly
pubescent. Flowers few, rose; calyx lobes lanceolate, acute, ⅓ in. long.
Fruits nearly glabrous, ⅓ in. long, calyx persistent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Atazilli).


=D. Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Bushy plant, 4 ft. high. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtuse, 1½-3 in.
long, ¾-1 in. broad, hispidulous, 5-nerved. Flowers with 2 large bracts
at the base, mauve; calyx densely covered with very hairy bristles;
smaller lobes between the calyx lobes.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=D. scabra= _Gilg._

Herb, 3-4 ft., stems subquadrangular. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, 4 in.
long, 1½-2 in. broad, scabrid above, scabrid-puberulous below. Flowers
in terminal cymes. Calyx with numerous disk-like processes outside,
setose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: between Tonj & Duguru & Niamniam-land:
Kulensho).


187 =Tristemma roseum= _Gilg._

Branchlets slender, glabrous. Leaves elliptic, acute, 2½ in. long, 1 in.
broad, slightly setulose. Involucres sessile. Receptacle glabrous. Calyx
lobes obtuse. Flowers rose.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Assika River).


=T. Incompletum= _R. Br._

Erect, bristly shrub; branches 4-angled. Leaves opposite, elliptic to
lanceolate, 4-6 in. long, 5-7 nerved, hairy. Flowers capitate, enclosed
in broad, hairy bracts. Receptacle with a single ring of bristles.
Petals ¼ in., white or pink; stamens 10, mostly equal, with 1 pore,
2-tubercled; crown of ovary bristly. Fruit dry.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).


=T. papillosum= _Gilg._

Erect shrub, bristly; branches 4-angled. Leaves opposite, elliptic to
lanceolate, 4-6 in. long, 5-7 nerved, hairy. Flowers capitate, enclosed
in leafy bracts. Receptacle quite glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=T. grandifolium= _Gilg._

Branches setose. Leaves ovate-elliptic, acuminate, pubescent on both
surfaces, 5 in. long, 2½ in. broad. Involucres sessile, 4-7 flowered.
Receptacle with 2 rings of hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


                             =COMBRETACEÆ.=


188 =Terminalia macroptera= _Guill._ & _Perr._ DAROT or DURŪT—Arab;
KOTWANG (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Tree, 60 ft. high. Leaves alternate, 1 ft. or more long, ovate, tips
sometimes reflexed. Flowers small, green or white, in lax axillary
spikes; petals (as in others of this genus) 0; stamens 10, in 2 rows.
Fruit 2-winged, 3-4 in. long, 1 in. broad.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).

Exudes a gum. Bark burnt as perfume by Sudanese women. Wood handsome and
close grained, has been sold as Teak.


=T. near macroptera= _Guill._ & _Perr._ SIORO—Golo.

Young leaves purplish, slightly pubescent, mature elliptic, cuneate at
each end, about 9 in. long, 3-3½ in. broad, at length quite glabrous.
Flowers and fruits not seen.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


=T. laxiflora= _Engl._ GURFA—Bongo.

Medium tree. Leaves elliptic, rounded at the base, about 6 in. long and
3 in. broad, glabrous. Spikes axillary, very slender, 5-6 in. long.
Fruit 2-winged, 3 in. long, 1 in. broad. Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas); Khor Dehab, Blue Nile.


=T. Schweinfurthii= _Eng._ & _Diels._ DURŪT—Arab; LINGA—Dinka.

Very similar to preceding, but leaves very unequal-sided and cuneate at
the base and narrowed to the apex.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: near the Gendua River); Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts.
Prov. (Um Seneina, near J. El Amira & Singukai); Bahr El Ghazal &
Mongalla Provinces.


=T. aff. T. Schweinfurthii= _Eng._ & _Diels._ TAMAREIB (Kordn.)—Arab.

Leaves verticillate, ovate to oblong-elliptic, obtuse, sub-cuneate at
the base, 3-4 in. long, strongly reticulate and tomentellous below.
Fruits narrowly oblong, 2½ in. long, ¾ in. broad, flat, glabrous.

Kordofan Prov. (near Um Ruaba).


=T. salicifolia= _Schwfth._

Stems and leaves glaucous, glabrous. Leaves lanceolate, acute at both
ends, 6 in. long, 1-1¾ in. broad, finely reticulate below. Spikes
axillary. Young fruit pubescent.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=T. torulosa= _F. Hoffm._

Tree, 30 ft. Leaves elliptic, rounded at each end, about 9 in. long and
5 in. broad, softly tomentose below and strongly nerved. Spikes about 4
in. long, tomentose. Fruit 3 in. long, 1 in. broad, tomentellous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=T. sp.=

Tree, 15 ft. high. Leaves broadly elliptic, rounded at each end, 8 in.
long and 5 in. broad, reticulate and sparsely pubescent below, with
about 15 pairs of lateral nerves. Flowers and fruit not seen.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, III 228 Schwfth).


=T. Spekei= _Rolfe._

Small tree with rough bark, 10 to 20 ft. high. Leaves elongate oblong-
obovate, about 12 in. long and 4 in. broad, very densely and softly
tomentose below, with very strong lateral nerves. Fruits oblong-
elliptic, 3 in. long, 1½ in. broad, tomentellous.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=T. splendida= _Engl._ & _Diels._ DURŪT—Arab; FIOK or PHUK—Dinka; TO &
FIAWE—Golo; FIOK & POH—Jur; GURFA—Bongo; BAKAIPUR—Zande.

Tree, 50 ft. high, with rough bark. Leaves large, elliptic, slightly
narrowed at each end, 9 in. long, 4 in. broad, leathery, softly
tomentose below.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

Bark rough; when powdered, is used as snuff by Sudanese women. This
species is very resistant to grass fires.


=T. Brownei= _Fresen._ SUBAKH & SUBARAYA—Arab; TAHAT—Rashida;
’MBRA—Nuba.

Large tree, with delicate branch tracery; old bark rough, young bark
smooth, whitish. Fruit 2-winged, purplish-red, up to 3 in. long. Leaves
in large tufts near the ends of branches, broadly lanceolate or elliptic
acuminate.

Fung Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 5,200 ft.); Kordofan Prov.; Red Sea
Prov. (Has Has).


=T. sericea= _Burch._

Small tree; bark steel coloured; the whole covered with silky
pubescence. Leaves crowded in pseudo-verticils, oblanceolate-cuspidate.
Fruit 2-winged, roundish-ovate, rusty-velvety, 1 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Biri River).


=T. sp. 1337= _Schwfth._

Shrub, with viscid young parts. Leaves (very young) ovate-elliptic,
small, with about 5 pairs of lateral nerves, pubescent on the midrib.
Spikes short.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=T. glabra= _Roxb._

Very large tree with smooth bark, flaking off in large pieces. Leaves
sub-opposite. Fruit 1½ in. long, 5-winged.

Introduced.

Exudes a gum. The timber is light-brown in colour and fairly strong, but
does not resist white ants. The bark is sometimes used for dyeing; it is
also considered tonic and astringent. A fine white lime-like ash is
obtained by burning the bark.


=T. Dawei= _Rolfe._

Small tree. Leaves elongate-obovate, up to 12 in. long and 4 in. broad,
with numerous lateral nerves. Flowers not seen. Fruits red, glaucous,
flat, 4 in. long, 1¾ in. broad.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


189 =Anogeissus leiocarpus= _Guill._ & _Perr._ SAHABA (Kordofan) &
SEILAG—Arab; DARO—Rashida; SHIRGI (Dilling), KÏRĪD (J. Eliri) & TAMURU
(Kadugli)—Nuba; SINGA & M’BA—Golo; KHAI—Hameg; AMMET (Goz El
Siada)—Dinka; YIN—Burun; MET—Nuer; SIRINGA—Bongo; BANGA—Zande.

Tall, graceful tree, with slender drooping branches and smooth bark
which flakes off. Leaves alternate, ovate-lanceolate. Flowers in globose
heads, small; petals 0; fruit small, coriaceous, broadly 2-winged.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung, Kordofan & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces;
Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada); Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Darfur
Prov.; Red Sea Prov. (Has Has).

Timber white, strong, elastic, useful for building carts, implements,
etc. Not suitable for railway sleepers. The roots are rich in tannin and
the wood ashes are used in W. Africa as a mordant for fixing dyes.
Yields an insoluble gum.


=A. near leiocarpus= _Guill._ & _Perr._ SAHABA—Arab.

Differs chiefly by its more marked heartwood.

Kordofan Prov.

Timber dark, hard and capable of taking a good polish.


190 =Gulera senegalensis= _Lam._ OBEISH or RUBEISH—Arab; KŪĪ (J.
Eliri)—Nuba.

Small tree or shrub with downy branches, the whole plant minutely black
dotted. Leaves opposite, oval, subcordate, cuspidate. Flowers in
pedunculate involucrate heads. Fruit densely clothed with very long
silky hairs, making a fluffy head.

Kordofan, Darfur & Nuba Mts. Provinces.

Good camel fodder.


191 =Combretum trichanthum= _Fresen._ TARŌB—Rashida; SHĀF—Hadendowa.

Small tree; young branches pubescent. Leaves opposite, elliptic to
elliptic-lanceolate, 4-8 in. long, densely hairy when young. Flowers
4-merous, small, in axillary spikes; petals obdeltoid, minutely fringed
stamens 8, in 2 rows; fruit 4-5 winged, ¾ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=C. Hartmannianum= _Schwfth._ HABIL (White Nile), SUBAKH or SUBAKH SODA
(Fung)—Arab; KARSO (J. Daier), HAGGIARN (Dilling), KWAE (J. Eliri) &
N’DARU (Kadugli)—Nuba.

Small to fairly large tree. Leaves opposite, long acuminate-caudate.
Flowers: calyx 4-lobed; petals 4, minute; stamens 8, in 2 rows. Fruit
4-winged.

Fung Prov. (Roseires & Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (Jebelein); Nuba
Mts. Prov.; Red Sea Prov. (Has Has).

Exudes a gum. The timber is said to be good. Some portions of the tree
are used as perfume by the Nuba.


=C. lecananthum= _Engl._ & _Diels._ M’NA—Golo; DERA—Jur.

Small tree. Leaves oblong-elliptic, 4 in. long, 1-1¾ in. broad, thin,
glabrous. Racemes shorter than the leaves, slender. Fruits broadly
elliptic, 1 in. long, 4-winged, glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


=C. multispicatum= _Engl._ & _Diels._ HABIL—Arab; MANĀ or TEPELU—Golo;
GŎK—Nuer.

Moderate-sized tree; branchlets and leaves pubescent, the latter
alternate, broadly oblong-elliptic, mucronate, 4 in. long, 1¾ in. broad,
glossy when young. Flowers paniculate, pubescent, small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo & Jur-lands).


=C. ghasalense= _Engl._ & _Diels._ HABIL—Arab; TEPELU—Golo; BAZE—Zande.

Moderate-sized tree. Leaves in whorls of 3, oblong-elliptic, acute at
both ends, 3 in. long, 1¼ in. broad, glabrous and closely reticulate on
both surfaces. Flowers in short panicles, crowded.

Kordofan Prov. (Fertangul); Darfur Prov., Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla
Provinces.

The smoke from the wood is used as perfume by Sudanese women.


=C. brunneum= _Engl._ & _Diels._

Small tree, 20 ft. high; branchlets glabrous. Leaves opposite, ovate-
lanceolate, rounded or subcordate at the base, obtuse and emarginate at
the apex, 2-2½ in. long, about 1 in. broad, reddish-brown and closely
reticulate when dry. Fruits sub-orbicular, 4-winged, ¾ in. broad.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Mittu-land).


=C. undulatum= _Wall._ SUBAKH or SUBAKH BEIDA (Fung)—Arab; BOGWEH—Bari;
BAZI—Hameg.

Tree, 40 ft. high: branchlets glabrous. Leaves in whorls of 3, oblong-
elliptic, acute, 6 in. long, 2 in. broad, undulate, glossy or viscid
when young. Flower paniculate, small, hairy.

Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Ghebeish); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land:
Kutshuk Ali & Mittu-land: Ngama); Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Thombé).

The smoke from the wood is used as perfume by Sudanese women.


=C. glutinosum= _Perr._

Small tree. Leaves in whorls of 3 or 4. Fruit 4-winged. Flowers small,
pubescent, greenish-white, on small axillary spikes.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=C. cordofanum= _Engl._ & _Diels._

Leaves obovate-elliptic, acutely acuminate, 6 in. long, 2½ in. broad,
softly tomentose below. Fruits thinly winged, oblong, truncate at the
base, 1 in. long, ¾ in. broad, puberulous.

Kordofan Prov. (Um Dajog).


=C. gallabatense= _Schwfth._

Middle-sized tree. Leaves about 6 in. long, lanceolate, hoary pubescent.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=C. Schweinfurthii= _Engl._ & _Diels._

Tree. Leaves variable, from 1½ in. long, obovate to 12 in. long, broadly
lanceolate, acute to acuminate. Fruit 4-winged.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Ngoli & Niamniam-land, by the
Gumango).


=C. verticillatum= _Engl._

Small tree, branchlets rusty tomentellous. Leaves in whorls of 4,
lanceolate-elliptic, long acuminate, about 8 in. long and 2 in. broad,
shortly pubescent and rather densely lepidote-glandular below. Flower-
spikes axillary, 2½ in. long. Fruits 4-winged, ¾ in. long, tomentose
between the wings.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land & Bongo-land: Gir).


=C. bongense= _Engl._

Shrub with sweet-smelling flowers. Leaves clustered ovate-lanceolate,
subacute, 3½ in. long, 1½ in. broad, very densely lepidote below, with
tufts of hairs in the axils of the leaves. Spikes simple, 3 in. long,
tomentose. Fruits broadly elliptic, 1¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Dakuttu); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Debri).


=C. adenogonium= _Steud._

Tree. Leaves usually ternate, ovate to lanceolate, downy beneath,
leaving deep scars after falling off. Flowering branches leafless.
Flowers small on short woolly spikes. Fruit 4-5-winged, about 1 in.
long, shining.

Darfur Prov.


=C. populifolium= _Engl._ & _Diels._ BEMBU—Golo.

Shrub or tree, 20 ft. high. Leaves in whorls of 3, elliptic, sub-
acuminate, 3 in. long, 1½ in. broad, densely lepidote below. Fruits
suborbicular, 1 in. broad, densely rusty-lepidote.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land; S.W. of Old Wau).


=C. splendens= _Engl._

Branchlets softly pubescent. Leaves ovate, more or less slightly cordate
at the base, acute, about 5 in. long and 3 in. broad, softly pubescent
on both surfaces. Flowers crowded in short spikes, hairy. Fruits
elliptic, lepidote, 1¼ in. long.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, mid-zone).


=C. lepidotum= _Hochst._

Tree; branches compressed, scaly. Leaves opposite, ovate, acute, 2-4 in.
long, viscid, glandular above and densely scaly beneath. Flowers in
axillary spikes of the length of the leaves. Fruit lepidote.

Fung. Prov.


=C. collinum= _Fresen._ UM-SUMAIN—Arab; ARGADA—Hameg.

Small tree; fruit 4-winged. Leaves sub-opposite, 3-5 in. long, ovate to
elliptical, sparingly scaly above, densely so beneath. Flowers small in
simple axillary spikes shorter than the leaves.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Tombé).


=C. parvulum= _Engl._ & _Diels._

Undershrub from a woody rhizome. Leaves oblong, rounded at both ends,
very mucronate, 3½ in. long, very strongly reticulate below, pubescent
between the veins. Flowers few and clustered at the ends of the
peduncle. Fruits broadly elliptic, with membranous wings 1 in. long,
puberulous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


=C. paniculatum= _Vent._

Climber with large panicles of small scarlet flowers. Leaves with
twisted stalks, elliptic, 5 in. long, 2½ in. broad, glabrous. Fruits
suborbicular, with broad membranous wings about 1 in. across.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Kuddu).


=C. capituliflorum= _Fenzl._

Woody climber. Flowers in globose, densely woolly heads arranged in
short terminal and axillary panicles, dull yellow. Leaves opposite or
ternate, lanceolate, undulate 4-6 in. long. Fruit 1½ in. long; wings
narrow, woody.

Blue Nile Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Bongo-land); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=C. molle= _R. Br._

Shrub or small tree; young leaves densely hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Biri River & Deim Zubeir).


=C. racemosum= _Beauv._

Showy shrub, 20 ft. high. Young leaves and flowers carmine.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. mittuense= _Engl._ & _Diels._

Climber. Leaves oblong-elliptic, acute, about 4 in. long, 2 in. broad,
thinly papery, glabrous. Flowers paniculate, with coloured leafy bracts,
pale pink, tassel-like; calyx green; stamens carmine. Fruits obovate,
with very membranous wings, about 1 in. across.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: by the Roah River).


=C. near C. comosum= _Don._

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


=C. aculeatum= _Vent._ SHEKHEIT (Fung), SHUHEIT (Dongola) & SHEHEIT
(Kordn.) or SOGHEIT—Arab; MARTE (Dilling) & MINDIGIRI (Kadugli)—Nuba;
REGA—Bari.

Scandent shrub. Petioles of leaves persistent, forming decurved spines.
Flowers rather small, white; calyx 5-lobed; petals 5; stamens 10;
anthers orange. Fruit 4-5-winged.

Dongola Prov. (Wadi Id El Murakh); Berber Prov. (Atbara River: Goz
Regeb); Red Sea Prov. (Khors, Karora Hills); Fung. Prov. (Jongol’s
Post); Blue Nile Prov. (Upper); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol);
Kordofan, Darfur, Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.


=C. platypterum= _Hutch._ & _J. M. Diels._

Climber with large panicles of reddish long, tubular flowers, about 1
in. long. Leaves oblong, rounded at the base, 6 in. long, glabrous.
Fruits like “Honesty,” orbicular-obovate, broadly winged, about 1½ in.
broad.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


=C. sp. (cf. C. altum= _Guill._ & _Perr._). KUSI (J. Daier)—Nuba.

Small tree; fruit 4-winged; shoots sometimes twining. Leaves ovate-
lanceolate, acute, 4 in. long, 2 in. broad, glabrous.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Daier). 884 S.G.H.


=C. sp.= GOAK—Dinka; BOADUN—Burun.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada).


                            =RHIZOPHORACEÆ.=


192 =Rhizophora sp.= Probably =R. mucronata= _Lam._

Mangrove. Leaves obovate-elliptic, long-mucronate, leathery, about 4½
in. long and 2 in. broad. Flowers few. Sepals oblong, leathery. Petals
hairy inside. Seeds germinating before falling.

Muddy shores of Red Sea, south of Suakin.


193 =Bruguiera gymnorrhiza= _Lam._

Tree with smooth bark, marked on young branches with scars of leaves and
stipules. Leaves rather thick, oval, bright green. Fruit scarlet, 1 in.
long. Seeds germinating before falling.

Muddy shores of Red Sea, south of Suakin.


                             =HYPERICACEÆ.=


194 =Hypericum Lalandii= _Choisy._

Small tufted herb, under 10 in. high. Leaves lanceolate or linear-
oblong, about ¼ in. long, gland-dotted. Flowers yellow in dichotomous
cymes.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=H. perforatum= _Linn._

Somewhat woody plant with perennial stock. Leaves with translucent and
some dark dots; corolla yellow with black dots. Stamens polyadelphous.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, over 6,000 ft.).


195 =Psorospermum salicifolium= _Engl._

Leaves lanceolate, acute, 2 in. long, ½ in. broad, glabrous. Flowers in
small close cymes. Sepals and petals streaked with resin, the latter
densely hairy inside.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Kutshuk Ali & Kuragera); Niamniam
(Tuhami).


=P. senegalense= _Spach._

Shrub; twigs and young leaves rusty tomentose. Flowers in dense corymbs,
white, streaked with brown; stamens 5-adelphous. Leaves opposite or
alternate, elliptic.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


=P. tenuifolium= _Hook. f._

Glabrous shrub. Leaves elliptic, opposite, opaquely punctate, 2-4 in.
long. Flowers in terminal corymbs; stamens 5-7-adelphous.

Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


196 =Haronga madagascariensis= _Chois._ KAWA (Mongalla Prov.)—Makraka.

Shrub or small tree. Leaves opposite, entire, rusty tomentose when
young, ovate-oblong, connected by an interpetiolar ridge. Flowers small,
5-adelphous, in broad terminal corymbose cymes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Khor Tela, between Wau & Tonj, and
near the Mongo-longbo stream); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).

The fruit is edible; the seeds are used in French Guinea in cookery. The
wood is of great beauty, it works well and finishes without trouble. A
yellow dye is obtained from the inner bark of the tree. It is found in
Mongalla Prov., frequently associated with _Berlinia acuminata_.


                              =GUTTIFERÆ.=


197 =Garcinia sp.=

Branchlets angular, glabrous. Leaves elliptic, shortly acuminate, acute
at the base, 3½ in. long, 1½ in. broad, with numerous lateral nerves
prominent on both surfaces. Fruits clustered, ⅔ in. long; stalks ½ in.
long.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Mbrwole River).


                              =TILIACEÆ.=


198 =Christiana africana= _DC._

Tall tree; young parts, leaves, stalks, calyx and carpels covered with
dense yellow stellate tomentum. Leaf stalks 3-4 in. long; leaves
cordate-ovate or oblong, palmately 5-nerved, 6-12 in. long. Flowers in
terminal corymbose cymes. Calyx 3-lobed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the River Hu).


199 =Grewia flavescens= _Burret._ GADDEIM (Darfur), UM KHALATOT (Goz El
Siada), KHELISAN & YABELAYUS—Arab; KINDAL (J. Eliri)—Nuba;
BAMBURTI—Golo.

Straggling shrub with quadrangular stems. Leaves sub-coriaceous, pilose,
ovate-oblong, subcordate, coarsely serrate, 2-4 in. long; stipules 2,
subulate-lanceolate, deciduous. Peduncles axillary, 2-3 flowered. Petals
emarginate. Drupe 1-4 lobed, pilose.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada);
Darfur Prov. (Kulme, & J. Marra, 4,000 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Khor
Niual: between Chak-Chak & Deim Zubeir & Bongo-land: Addai).


=G. venusta= _Fresen._ KURMUZ—Hameg.

Perennial or undershrub, white, stellately tomentose. Leaves roundish
oblong, palmately 3-5 nerved, 3-5 in. long. Cymes many flowered, extra
axillary. Drupe size of a large pea 2-4 lobed, crustaceous, copper-
coloured, pilose.

Blue Nile Prov.


=G. Kakothamnos= _K. Schum._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves obovate-elliptic, serrulate, about 1 in.
long, stellate-pubescent. Flowers axillary, subsolitary; pedicels ⅓ in.
long, bibracteate above the middle; sepals ½ in. long.

Darfur Prov.


=G. salvifolia= _Heyne._ BASHAM (Fung)—Arab; DILI—Burun; KEM (Goz El
Siada)—Dinka; BAIDI—Hameg.

Large shrub or small tree; fruit edible, usually 2-lobed. Leaves
lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, entire undulate or serrulate. Flowers
yellow in axillary fascicles.

Fung Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada).


=G. occidentalis= _Linn._

Small tree. Leaves obliquely ovate, acute, about 2 in. long and 1 in.
broad, crenate, nearly glabrous. Flowers 3-4 together in very small
umbels; sepals mauve inside, ½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Has Has).


=G. ferruginea= _Hochst._

A small tree. Leaves obovate-elliptic, acute, very closely crenulate,
4-5 in. long and about 2 in. broad, closely covered with short stellate
hairs below. Flowers in threes the middle one opening first; sepals
linear-lanceolate, ½ in. long, tomentose; fruits reticulate.

Locality? (fide Mrs. Crowfoot).


=G. mollis= _Juss._ BASHAM (Kordn.)—Arab; KUAM (J. Eliri)—Nuba; ULUMBA
or EUWI—Golo; KAM—Nuer; POIGO—Zande.

Shrub or small tree, giving out long, semi-scandent shoots. Leaves
ovate-lanceolate, with 3 basal nerves. Flowers yellow, solitary. Drupes
indistinctly 4-lobed, dark yellow.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J.
Debri & J. Eliri); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Niamniam-land &
Jur-land); Red Sea Prov. (Katai Geraita).

The bast yields a fibre; the wood ashes are used as a substitute for
salt; the fruit is edible; the wood is used for bows and arrows; it is
light red or pink, and very elastic.


=G. monticola= _Sond.?_ BASHAM (Baggara)—Arab.

Shrub. Leaves oblong, acute, 4 in. long, 1¾ in. broad, glabrescent
above, softly tomentellous below, 3-nerved at the base. Fruit the size
of a pea, whitish.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Um Durein & J. Fertangul).


=G. betulæfolia= _Juss._ GADDEIM—Arab; HEDDA—Rashida; TOMUT—Hadendowa;
KARII (J. Eliri) & ARUING (Rashad—Talodi)—Nuba; ANGALOA—Hameg; AFOR &
APOR (Kenissa) & AFWĀR (Renk)—Dinka; OFADOH—Shilluk.

Shrub. Leaves small, somewhat variable, irregularly crenate serrate;
flowers white, solitary; fruit orange coloured, 2-4 lobed, edible.

Almost throughout the Sudan, particularly south of Khartoum.


=G. erythræa= _Schwfth._

Shrub. Leaves rounded-obovate, 3-5 nerved at the base, repand-dentate,
about 1¼ in. long, slightly stellate-pubescent below. Flowers solitary;
calyx ⅓ in. long.

Kordofan Prov. (Darfur boundary on J. Sinin).


=G. villosa= _Willd._ TAMR EL ABID & TUKKU (Kordn.), ABU KHALAFOF &
GEREIGDAN (Goz el Siada), MUTRAK (Baggara)—Arab; EIGERA (Dilling), LUĪ
(J. Eliri) & TUMBU (Kadugli)—Nuba; ANTAMANA-WANSHU—Hameg; ATENDIT
(Renk), GUNKEIT & LUBLUB (Goz el Siada)—Dinka; DILMAN & KELAIIN—Burun.

Large shrub with cordate nearly orbicular leaves, 1-4 in. in diameter.
Flowers dull-yellow, in compact axillary clusters. Fruit globose, with a
brown, stellate hairy rind, edible.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.
(Kulme); Nuba Mts. Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada);
Mongalla Prov.; Red Sea Prov. (Has Has).

Used for spear shafts (Aylmer).


=G. sp. (Glomeratæ)= No. 1168 _S.G.H._ TOMUT—Hadendowa.

Shrub, covered with short, stellate hairs. Leaves ovate-rounded, 1½ in.
long, 1¼ in. broad, serrate. Flowers clustered. Buds ¼ in. long,
tomentose.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


200 =Triumfetta lepidota= _K. Schum._

Erect shrub, 4 ft. high. Leaves suborbicular to oblanceolate,
subtrilobed, up to 6 in. wide. Cymes 2-4 to each node. Sepals scaly
outside, ¾ in. long. Fruit woody, globose, 8-10 celled, strongly
tuberculate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the River Lehsi).


=T. micrantha= _K. Schum._

Leaves lanceolate-oblong, 2½-3 in. long, ½-¾ in. broad, serrulate,
tomentose or pubescent below. Sepals stellate-pubescent outside. Fruit
with densely pilose prickles, the latter with 2-8 terminal spinules.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi).


=T. buettneriacea= _K. Schum._

Leaves lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, 2-3 in. long, ⅓-1¼ in. broad,
sparingly pilose on both surfaces. Sepals stellate-pubescent outside.
Fruit with glabrescent prickles, much broadened at the base, terminated
by 1-4 spinules.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Jur Ghattas, & Bongoland: Gurfala).


=T. flavescens= _Hochst._ DERBAKE—Hadendowa.

Shrubby; stem pilose, black-dotted. Lower leaves stalked; blades
roundish, truncate or cordate, acute, irregularly toothed. Flowers
yellowish, numerous, in small clusters along the sides and ends of
branches. Capsule small, covered with grey down and small, hooked
prickles.

Red Sea Prov. (in several places).


=T. rhomboidea= _Jacq._ ALLOSEG, ALLUSEIG or LUSEIG—Arab.

Herb with variable, irregularly serrate leaves and small globose fruit
covered with prickles, downy. Flowers yellow, small, in spicate
inflorescence.

Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla,
etc.); Red Sea Prov. (Karora).

Yields a soft, glossy fibre. The mucilage is used as an injection in
venereal diseases.


=T. annua= _Linn._

Erect, somewhat pilose, annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves ovate, acuminate,
dentate, 3-nerved, on very long stalks. Fruit size of a pea, smooth
between the glaucous hooked prickles.

Darfur Prov. (Zalingei).


=T. pentandra= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Erect, slightly downy herb. Leaves subcordate, slightly 3-5 lobed or
roundish-acuminate. Flowers minute, in lateral cymes. Stamens 5-8. Fruit
oblong, about ¼ in. long, hairy on the edges of the appressed prickles.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=T. tomentosa= _Bojer._

Softly hairy perennial or shrub; fruit globose, covered with straight,
black spines. Leaves ovate to ovate-lanceolate, slightly cordate,
passing gradually into bracts. Flowers small, yellow, numerous in
terminal panicles.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


201 =Honckenya ficifolia= _Willd._

Handsome-flowered shrub, with purplish branches. Leaves rather variable,
usually more or less deeply 3-7 lobed. Flowers large, violet, in
terminal racemose cymes. Capsules 1-2 in., 4-valved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the River Yubbo).

A valuable fibre plant.


202 =Corchorus tridens= _Linn._

Annual 1-2 ft.; leaves oblong-linear, coarsely crenate-serrate, the two
lowest teeth often prolonged into filiform tails; capsule terminating in
3 spreading or reflexed points.

Between Suakin & Berber; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.
(J. Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=C. acutangulus= _Lam._

Annual; leaves oval or ovate, crenate-serrate, the two lowest teeth
often prolonged into filiform tails; fruit 3-winged.

Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


=C. olitorius= _Linn._ MOLOKHIA or MULUKHIA—Arab; MORAMBIDA—Zande.

Annual; leaves ovate-lanceolate, the two lowest serrations produced into
fine tails; capsule linear, with a long beak, altogether 1-3 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Between Khartoum & Berber (El Mesherif); Fung
Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla).

Cultivated and wild. It is used as a vegetable, the fibre is inferior to
that of the true jute. The plant is also used in native medicine.


=C. Antichorus= _Ræuschel._ SUTEIH (Atbara) & UM SHITEIH (N.
Kordn.)—Arab.

Prostrate or decumbent perennial. Leaves small, roundish, plicate-
crenate, palmately 3-nerved. Flowers solitary or in pairs. Capsule 1-1½
in. long, slender, beaked at apex, 4-valved.

Nubia; North Sudan; Berber Prov. (Atbara); Khartoum Prov. (Khartoum);
Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.

The plant is used as a demulcent.


=C. fascicularis= _DC._

Procumbent annual; leaves short-stalked, oblong or lanceolate, 1-2 in.
long, 3-nerved. Capsule about ¾ in. long, cylindrical, short-beaked.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Bunzaga); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Gir).


=C. trilocularis= _Linn._

Annual, erect or decumbent. Leaves 1-3 in. long, elliptic to oblong-
lanceolate. Pedicels short, 2-3 flowered; petals bright yellow. Capsules
2-3 in. long, 3-4 angled; beak short and straight.

White Nile Prov.


203 =Glyphæa grewioides= _Hook. f._

Slightly pilose shrub, 8-12 ft. high. Leaves ovate or oblong,
subcordate, 3-nerved. Flowers bright-yellow, in terminal cymes. Fruit
oblong or fusiform, indehiscent, 1-2 in. long. Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


                            =STERCULIACEÆ.=


204 =Melhania ferruginea= _A. Rich._

Woolly herb or undershrub. Leaves longer than the stalks, subcordate
oval-oblong, velvety, palmately 3-5 nerved. Epicalyx of 3 broadly-ovate,
unilateral segments. Petals convolute, persistent. Capsule pointed;
seeds 10 in each cell.

Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé).


=M. Denhamii= _R. Br._ DUBAGHA (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Undershrub with a false likeness to _Senra incana_. Leaves as long as
leaf-stalks, about 1 in. long, ovate-oblong, velvety. Flowers on
axillary peduncles, red. Capsules subglobose, 5-celled, with 1-2 seeds
in each cell.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.


205 =Dombeya multiflora= _Planch._

Shrub. Leaf blades equal to stalks, 1-2 in. long, cordate-roundish or
oblong, palmately 5-7 nerved. Inflorescence appearing before the leaves,
in stalked axillary cymes. Styled deeply 5-cleft.

Fung & White Nile Provinces.


=D. multiflora= _Pl._ =var. (a) vestita= _Schum._ GREGDAN
(Baggara)—Arab; KINDAMOI (J. Eliri)—Nuba; DERDER—Hameg; POPWA, PURPUR
and METEMBOA—Zande.

Shrub or small tree, with palmate leaves and white flowers, which turn
pink after being fertilized, the corolla persisting.

Fung Prov.; South Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra N.W. slopes
6,500 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


206 =Melochia corchorifolia= _Linn._

Erect herb or undershrub. Stem with a line of somewhat stellate hairs
down one side. Leaves variable in size, oblong-ovate to ovate, rounded
at base, serrate. Flowers pink, in terminal clusters, pentamerous.
Capsules 5-valved, 1 seed to each.

Kordofan Prov. (Rahad); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Upper White Nile
Prov. (Banks of the White Nile); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé).

Kordofan Prov.

=var. densiflora= _K. Schum._

The root-bark is chewed in Kordofan Prov. as a salve for sore lips. The
stem yields a fibre, and the leaves are eaten.


207 =Waltheria americana= _Linn._ ERG EL NĀL (Kordn.)—Arab.

Villose undershrub or tall woody herb; leaves plicate; flowers yellow,
in dense sessile axillary fascicles. Sepals 5, connate below; petals 5;
ovary 1-celled; ovules 2. Capsule small, enclosed in calyx, membranous,
1-seeded.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


208 =Hermannia modesta= _Planch._

Low growing annual, covered with glandular hairs. Leaves subsessile,
linear-oblong, obtuse up to 1½ in. long. Flowers in axillary peduncles.
Filaments dilated above; styles 5.

Red Sea Prov. (coast); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad).


=H. tigrensis= _Hochst._

Erect, stellate hairy annual, about 1 ft. high. Leaves subsessile,
elliptic-oblong, acute; stipules falcate. Flowers solitary on solitary
axillary peduncles; filaments petaloid.

Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid).


209 =Leptonychia chrysocarpa= _K. Schum._

Small tree. Leaves oblong-elliptic, obtusely long-acuminate, glabrous,
about 6 in. long and 2½ in. broad, entire. Flowers not seen. Fruits
axillary, about 3-4 together, depressed globose, stellate-tomentellous,
¾ in. in diameter.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Linduku).

Wood carved for ornaments.


210 =Sterculia tomentosa= _Guill._ & _Perr._ UMTELEIH (Baggara)—Arab;
KULOWI (J. Eliri); HEIMOR (J. Heiban); FEIDER (Rashad-Talodi); BOKARAK
(Kadugli)—Nuba; DA or KANDI—Golo; M’BURU—Zande.

Fairly large tree. Leaves palmate, large. Flowers small, in drooping
panicles; petals none. Capsule large, hairy, 3-4 valved. Seeds numerous,
brown, with small orange aril.

White Nile Prov. (Jebelein); South Kordofan Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr
El Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Bor).

Wood white or pale pink, soft, light, perishable. The seeds yield a dark
orange-red coloured oil. A fibre is obtained from the bast, and a clear
gum exuding from wounds in the bark, partly soluble in water, is used in
Europe for dyeing silk fabrics.


=S. cinerea= _A. Rich._ TARTAR—Arab; OMFA—Hameg.

Large tree with palmate leaves and scaly bark. Flowers numerous in much-
branched axillary panicles. Fruit of 3-5 sessile, reflexed follicles
which are downy outside and bristly within. Seeds numerous, black, with
yellow aril.

Fung and Kordofan Provinces.

Wood of poor quality. A gum, similar in quality to that of the
foregoing, exudes from the bark. Strips from the young plants are used
as cordage.


211 =Cola cordifolia= _R. Br._ KUKUROKU—Zande.

Large tree, 120 ft. Leaves very large, widely rotundate-cordate, entire
or slightly lobulate, up to 1 ft. broad, softly stellate-pubescent
below, strongly 7-nerved at the base. Cymes fulvous-tomentose. Fruits
velvety-tomentose, with large red seeds.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Yei River).

According to Wood in his Report on the Bahr El Ghazal forests, 1922,
“this tree is confined to the Southern Bahr El Ghazal, where it is
fairly common on banks of streams in the evergreen zone. A very lofty
tree, up to 120 ft., with straight stem and large, dense crown. Does not
lose its leaves. Bark brown, not very rough; wood white, soft,
perishable. Most of the large trees (10 ft. girth) are hollow in the
centre.”


                             =BOMBACACEÆ.=


212 =Adansonia digitata= _Linn._ TEBELDI, HOMEIRA, HUMR (Dongola)—Arab;
HUMAR—Hadendowa; FAK (J. Daier), TUBERLI (Dilling), KISHAWIYI (J.
Eliri), MANSALLO (Kadugli), ORA (Tagele)—Nuba; UFFA—Hameg;
DUNGWOL—Dinka; KUSHA—Nuer; GAG—Shilluk; BUL—Burun. The Baobab Tree.

A large tree, often of great girth; bark whitish, shining. Leaves
digitately 5-7 fol. Flowers 2-3 in. across, white. Fruit 8-10 in. long,
ovoid, filled with fibres and acid mealy pulp, in which the seeds are
embedded.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Dongola Prov. (Wadi El Murakh); Fung Prov.;
Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Hillet El Shilluk); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (North).

The hollow trunk is used for a reservoir for the storage of rain water,
and in some places as a burial place for dead. The bark yields a strong
fibre used for ropes, baskets, etc. The fruit, called GONGOLEIS by
Arabs, contains a subacid pulp which makes a pleasant drink with water,
and is used as a cooling medicine.


213 =Ceiba pentandra= _Gaertn._ _Eriodendron anfractuosum_ DC. Kapok or
Silk Cotton Tree.

Introduced.

Tree; young bark covered with conical prickles. Leaves digitately 8-15
foliolate. Flowers white, 2-8 together in axillary clusters. Capsule 3-4
in. long, densely lined with long silky hairs.

Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Kordofan
Prov. (Bara); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

The floss surrounding the seed is used for stuffing cushions, lifebelts,
etc.


                              =MALVACEÆ.=


214 =Malva parviflora= _Linn._ KHUBBEIZA—Arab.

Herb; stem trailing. Leaves cordate, orbicular, slightly 3-5 lobed,
crenate-dentate. Flowers purplish, in axillary, few-flowered clusters.
Stamens monadelphous, anthers to top of column; stigmas linear.

Cultivated in most parts.

Cooked as a pot-herb, also used medicinally to allay irritation both
externally and internally.


=M. verticillata= _Linn._

Erect herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves cordate, roundish, 5-lobed. Flowers
purplish, in dense axillary or terminal clusters. Carpels 10-12 in a
whorl, enclosed in accrescent calyx.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


215 =Malvastrum spicatum= _A. Gray._

Erect, branching herb, 1-2 ft. high, stellately tomentose. Leaves ovate,
crenate-serrate, sometimes lobed. Bracts of epicalyx shorter than calyx.
Flowers small, yellow, in a dense terminal, leafy spike; stigmas
capitate.

Fung Prov.


=M. tricuspidatum= _A. Gray._

Erect herb, 2-3 ft. high, with adpressed, simple hairs. Leaves long-
stalked, ovate-lanceolate, toothed, hairy. Flowers yellow, subsessile in
axillary and terminal clusters. Carpels 8-12, each 3-pointed.

Fung Prov.


216 =Sida urens= _Linn._

Erect, hirsute perennial. Leaves cordate, ovate-serrate. Flowers usually
in dense axillary clusters; epicalyx 0; carpels 5, awnless or with short
beaks.

White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ghabat El Arab;
Bongo-land: Gir).


=S. humilis= _Cav._

Perennial; branches long, prostrate, rooting at the nodes. Flowers pale
yellow, under ½ in. diameter. Leaves broad-ovate, cordate, variable in
size. Ripe carpels 5, separating from the axis, pointed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: near Khor Mulmul).


=S. spinosa= _Linn._

Annual or perennial, much branched, often with small, recurved prickles
at the nodes below the petioles. Leaves oval to oblong, crenate-serrate.
Flowers white, ½ in. in diameter. Ripe carpels 5, with 2 long, rough
beaks.

Nubia; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Between Khartoum & Berber; White Nile
Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme).

The leaves are demulcent, the root is a tonic and is used in some cases
of cattle disease.


=S. cordifolia= _Linn._

Erect, much branched, semi-shrubby, with silky hair; leaves densely
velvety, ovate, cordate; flowers yellow; ripe carpels 10, wrinkled, with
2 straight beaks.

Nubia; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla
Prov.

The root and seeds are used in native medicines.


=S. rhombifolia= _Linn._

Shrubby; branches rough with stellate hair. Leaves rhomboid-lanceolate,
dentate-serrate above, stellate hairy on under-surface. Flowers yellow;
ripe carpels 9-10, beaked or not beaked.

White Nile Prov.; Mongalla Prov.; Darfur Prov. (shady places).

Roots used for rheumatism. Yields an excellent fibre.


=S. grewioides= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Shrubby plant. Leaves oblong or roundish, cordate, crenate, downy on
both surfaces. Flowers small, yellow, axillary, solitary or in pairs;
carpels 7-8, indehiscent, beakless or beaked; beaks inflexed.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.
(River Sobat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé); Mongalla Prov.; Darfur
Prov.


=S. Schweinfurthii= _E. G. Baker._

Leaves shortly petiolate, broadly ovate, coarsely and double serrate,
cordate, about 4½ in. long and 3 in. broad, shortly stellate-pubescent
on both surfaces. Flowers numerous in lax, very slender panicles;
pedicels filiform.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: near Mongbo-longbo stream).


217 =Wissadula rostrata= _Planch._

Tall, shrubby plant. Leaves cordate. Flowers small, yellow, paniculate;
carpels 5, beaked.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.;
Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov.

Yields a good fibre.


218 =Abutilon angulatum= _Mast._ AMBORU, UMBARU or UMBORU—Arab; BUTNIEID
(Dilling)—Nuba.

Tall, woody herb, up to 8 ft. high. Leaves long-stalked, roundish,
cordate, 5-7 nerved, pale on under-surface. Flowers yellow, on loose
terminal panicle. Fruit globose, depressed; carpels about 20, obtuse,
reniform, 1-seeded.

Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.
(Meshra El Zeraf); Nuba Mountains Prov. (Dilling); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Wau); Mongalla Prov.


=A. graveolens= _Wight_ & _Arnott._ MAKHSHASH EL RIGAL (Baggara)—Arab;
DOEIRI (Dilling)—Nuba.

Downy, bushy herb; calyx large, densely pubescent; corolla yellow,
sometimes turning pink on withering. Leaves ovate, cordate, somewhat
dentate, pubescent, pale beneath. Carpels 20 or more, 3-seeded.

Khartoum to Berber; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Nuba
Mountains Prov.; Red Sea Prov.

The leaves and root are used in medicine; the stems yield a fibre.


=A. glaucum= _Webb._ HANBŪK & UMBUR—Arab. The fruit GARGADAN.

Downy undershrub. Corolla yellow, with purple centre. Leaves cordate,
7-9 nerved, irregular dentate, as long as the stalk. Carpels 20 or more,
2-3 seeded.

Red Sea Prov.; Berber Prov.; Kassala Prov.; Khartoum Prov. & South.


=A. fruticosum= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Densely white-downy, much branched, rigid perennial. Leaves small,
short-stalked, cordate, denticulate. Peduncles axillary, 1-3 flowered.
Carpels 10, persistent, 2-3 seeded.

Red Sea Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan
Prov.; Darfur Prov.


=A. ramosum= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Erect branching, hairy perennial. Leaves cordate, sometimes 3-lobed, 5-7
nerved, long-stalked. Peduncles axillary and terminal, shorter than
leaf-stalks; flowers white or yellow. Carpels 8-10, long 2-awned.

Fung & Kordofan Provinces.


=A. bidentatum= _Hochst._

Erect undershrub with downy branches. Leaves short-stalked, cordate-
ovate, denticulate, pilose. Flowers in small axillary panicles. Fruit
subglobose; carpels 16-20, each with 2 teeth; seeds 3 in each carpel.

Red Sea, Fung & Kordofan Provinces.


=A. hirtum= _Don._

Erect, downy perennial. Leaves long-stalked, ovate-cordate, serrate 6-7
nerved. Peduncles axillary or terminal, 1 or more flowered. Petals
large, bright orange, hairy at base. Fruit truncate; carpels 12 or more,
short bidentate; seeds 3.

Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok).


219 =Malachra radiata= _Linn._

Tall, hispid herb; flowers small, pink, in dense heads with distinct
bractlets and surrounded by a general involucre.

Fruit turbinate; carpels 5. Leaves short-stalked, palmately 5-7 lobed.

Upper White Nile Prov. (mouth of Bahr El Zeraf); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


220 =Urena lobata= _Linn._ KĀRI (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Tall herb, erect, branched, covered with stellate hairs. Leaves
shallowly 5-lobed; flowers pink. Ripe carpels 5, densely stellate hairy
and covered with spines deflexed at the ends.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; South Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Ghabat El Arab & Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov.

The bark yields a fibre of good quality, suitable for bags, twine, etc.


221 =Pavonia hirsuta= _Guill._ & _Perr._ UMBERRU (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Downy perennial or undershrub; branches or stems procumbent, up to 5-6
ft. long. Leaves scabrous above, cordate, suborbicular or obscurely
3-lobed. Flowers yellow, with purple centres, on solitary stalks in
axils of upper leaves. Styles 10; carpels 10, covered with reflexed
bristles. White Nile, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=P. glechomæfolia= _A. Rich._ KULAM & KUNUTAL (Blue Nile)—Arab.

Rigid herb with slender hirsute branches. Leaves ovate, cordate,
slightly 3-lobed, crenate-serrate. Flowers yellow, about 1 in. across,
with 5 free, oval bracteoles. Ripe carpels 5, without beak.

Blue Nile Prov. (Abu Haraz); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur (Kulme); Red Sea
Prov. (Has Has).


=P. triloba= _Hochst._

Erect, bushy herb; stems long-pilose. Leaves more or less trilobed,
about 1¼ in. long, with two types of stellate hairs below. Epicalyx
persistent, of several linear bracts.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=P. arabica= _Hochst._

Erect tomentose perennial. Leaves as long as stalks, oblong, subcordate.
Peduncles solitary, axillary; epicalyx of 10-20 linear, villose bracts,
arching over the ripe fruit. Corolla pink, longer than calyx. Fruit
subglobose, size of a pea.

Red Sea Prov.; 21° N. Lat.; Darfur Prov.


=P. Kotschyi= _Hochst._

Densely villose, low growing, woody perennial. Leaves oblong-ovate,
obtuse, coarsely serrate, 3-5 nerved. Epicalyx of 10 linear bracts.
Peduncles axillary, solitary, 1-flowered. Corolla yellow, about 1 in.
across. Carpels 5, each with 2 large wings.

Fung & Kordofan Provinces.


=P. zeylanica= _Cav._

Leaves digitately divided almost to the base, lobes 3-5, oblanceolate, 1
in. long, densely tomentose below with stellate hairs; flowers solitary,
on long pedicels; epicalyx of 10 linear bracts; fruits slightly winged.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora).


=P. macrophylla= _E. Mey._

Tall pilose herb or undershrub. Leaves long-stalked, oval, cordate-
acuminate, or 3-lobed, crenate-serrate. Peduncles axillary, 1-flowered.
Epicalyx of usually 5 foliaceous segments; petals pink; styles 8-10;
carpels 5, obovate.

White Nile Prov.


222 =Kosteletzkya adoensis= _Hochst._

Large herb or undershrub. A line of hairs along one side of the stem
shifts to the other side at each successive joint. Leaves long-stalked,
roundish-cordate, acuminate, 3-nerved, sometimes 3-pointed, hispid.
Epicalyx of 7-10 linear-lanceolate bractlets. Corolla yellow. Carpels 5;
seeds flat.

Fung Prov.


=K. flava= _Bak. f._ (_K. Buettneri_ Gürke).

Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, up to 5 in. long and ½ in. broad,
the lower often hastate at the base, serrulate, scabrid. Flowers
solitary, axillary. Epicalyx of 7-10 linear bracts a little shorter than
the calyx. Fruits depressed, pentagonal, bristly.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=K. Chevalieri= _Hochr._

Erect herb with rod-like stems, about 4 ft. high, densely strigose-
hispid. Leaves suborbicular, widely cordate at the base, slightly
3-lobed, about 2 cm. diameter, softly stellate-pilose. Flowers in dense
terminal spikes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land; Bongo-land; Kulongo).


223 =Senra incana= _Cav._

Soft, downy undershrub; corolla deep purple. Epicalyx of 3 cordate
palmi-nerved leaflets. Capsule 5-valved, ovoid; seed 3-pilose. Leaves
palmately 3-5 lobed.

Fung & White Nile Provinces.


224 =Hibiscus Trionum= _Linn._

Much branched, hispid annual. Flower yellow, with a purple centre; calyx
persistent, ventricose, accrescent. Epicalyx 7-12 linear segments.
Leaves long-stalked, usually deeply palmately 3-5 lobed.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & Soturba); Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol).


=H. dictyocarpus= _Webb._

Stem woody, erect, hairy. Leaves long-stalked, 3-5 lobed, central lobe
longest. Epicalyx of 10-12 linear, spathulate bracts. Peduncles
solitary, axillary. Corolla yellow, with purple centre. Styles 5. Fruit
roundish, 5-winged.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=H. vitifolius= _Linn._

Tall, much-branched perennial. Flowers bright yellow, with a purple
centre; bracteoles 5-8. Leaves palmate, 3-5 lobed, serrate. Capsules
5-winged. Epicalyx of 8-12 linear bracts.

Red Sea Prov.; Fung Prov. (Saoleil).


=H. obtusilobus= _Gärcke._

Herb, 18 in. high. Leaves longer than stalks, cordate, 3-5 lobed,
central longest. Epicalyx of 6-9 linear-oblong bracts, shorter than
calyx; calyx segments 1-nerved. Capsule covered with forked bristles.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=H. diversifolius= _Jacq._

Tall, prickly herb. Flowers large, yellow, with red-purple centre;
bracteoles 5-8. Leaves palmate, 3-5 lobed, long-stalked. Capsule
pointed, hispid, ultimately smooth. Epicalyx of numerous subulate
segments.

Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


=H. corymbosus= _Hochst._

Erect, stellate-tomentose perennial, 2-3 ft. high. Lower leaves deeply
3-lobed, upper simple, oblong-lanceolate. Flowers yellow, crowded,
corymbose. Epicalyx of 8-10 linear segments.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: near Dogguru, & Niamniam-land: Gumba &
Bendo).


=H. physaloides= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Herb with somewhat irritant hairs. Flowers solitary, pale yellow, with
maroon centre, or purple. Leaves variable, long-stalked. Epicalyx of
about 10 filiform segments, shorter than calyx. Capsule ovoid, beaked,
hispid.

Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Shambé); Mongalla Prov.
(Gondokoro); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=H. intermedius= _A. Rich._

A weak herb with deeply 3-5 lobed glandular leaves, pilose on the
nerves, with weak hairs; flowers axillary, solitary, pale-yellow with
purple centre; pedicels ⅓ in. long. Epicalyx of 10 linear bracts;
capsule pubescent.

Red Sea Prov. (Has Has); Bahr el Jebel (Sheikh Tombé).


=H. rhabdotospermus= _Gärcke._

Woody herb, downy or villose. Leaves cordate, ovate, palmately 5-7
nerved. Epicalyx of 15-20 linear segments; corolla yellow, 1 in. across.
Capsule ovate, woody.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=H. articulatus= _Hochst._

Herb with yellow flowers, up to 2 in. diameter. Leaves short-stalked,
rough, upper ones palmately 3-5-partite, lower ones roundish. Epicalyx
of 8-10 strap-shaped segments.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat mouth);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Wau & Deim Zubeir); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla).


=H. surattensis= _Linn._

Scrambling, prickly herb, with solitary, showy pale-yellow flowers with
a purple centre, 2-4 in. across. Epicalyx of 10-12 linear-spathulate
segments. Leaves palmately 3-5 lobed, secondary nerves distinct.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Nabambisso River).


=H. lunariifolius= _Willd._ SHALIGA (Kordn.) & MIMLIGADA (Fung)—Arab.

Tall herb, with showy yellow flowers, with dark centre; bracteoles 5-7,
linear, as long as sepals. Leaves ovate, cordate, generally 3-5 lobed,
coarsely serrate dentate, densely tomentose with stiff stellate hairs.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper Nile Prov.
(Renk).

Yields a good fibre.


=H. rostellatus= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Prickly and hairy herb. Leaves cordate, angular, palmately 5-lobed.
Epicalyx of 10 linear segments, much shorter than calyx and each
provided at apex with a spoon-shaped appendix. Flowers pink, rather
large.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Nabambisso River).


=H. calycinus= _Willd._

Undershrub. Leaves downy to subglabrous, obtusely 3-5 angled. Flowers
solitary, large, yellow, with purple centre. Epicalyx of 5 broadly
spathulate, acute bracts, equal to the 5-nerved segments of calyx.

Fung & White Nile Provinces.


=H. panduriformis= _Burm._ BUTNIEID (Dilling)—Nuba.

Bushy herb, up to 6 ft. high and covered with bristly hairs. Leaves
ovate, often somewhat 3-lobed, cordate, tomentose. Flowers yellow with
purple centre; bracteoles 7-10, connate below, spathulate-linear.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli, Wad El Abbas, & Jongol’s
Post); Nuba Mountains Prov. (Dilling); Mongalla Prov. (Bari country);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ghabat El Arab); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=H. Grantii= _Mast._

Erect, villous undershrub. Leaves very short-stalked, sub-cordate,
somewhat wedge-shaped at base and slightly 3-lobed at apex. Flowers
numerous, in terminal leafy panicles. Epicalyx of 12 linear bracts;
petals pink.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=H. Sabdariffa= _Linn._ KARKADE, KIRKEN or JO (Darfur)—Arab; KOKORO
(Kadugli)—Nuba; LAKBUR—Bari; TED (Ghabat El Arab)—Nuer; NOMBA—Zande.

Erect annual or perennial. The cultivated plant usually takes a deep red
colour. Capsule ovoid, pointed. Leaves entire or with shallow lobes.

Generally cultivated, but occurs wild in Southern Sudan. The fleshy
calyx is subacid and is used to prepare a refreshing drink. The plant
yields a strong, silky fibre; it is known as Rozelle or Red Sorrel in
the West Indies.


=H. cannabinus= _Linn._ TIL—Arab; N’ZEEBEE—Zande.

Tall herb; all parts hairy. Flowers yellow with maroon centre. Leaves
deeply 5-7 lobed. Epicalyx of 5-7 segments. Capsule pointed.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile; Upper
White Nile, Kordofan; Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.

Two varieties are in cultivation, both are used for the fibre which is
made into Sagia ropes. The seeds yield an oil; the leaves possess
aperient properties.


=H. micranthus= _Linn._ GHUBEISH (N. Kordn.)—Arab. Undershrub with
spreading branches and stellate pubescence. Leaves 3-nerved, wedge-
shaped at base, about 1 in. long. Flowers ½ in. long, pink. Epicalyx of
7-8 linear segments. Seeds numerous, cottony.

Red Sea Prov.; White Nile Prov. (El Dueim); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.
(J. Sungur); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=H. micranthus= _Linn._, =var.= ABUTKULA—Hadendowa.

Procumbent herb, with white flowers, turning pink after fertilisation.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Darfur Prov.


=H. ternatus= _Mast._

Erect branching herb. Leaves palmately 3-lobed, upper leaves more deeply
cut. Epicalyx none; calyx lobes 3-nerved; corolla yellow, under 1 in.
long. Capsule pointed, hairy. White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Mongalla
Prov. (Sh. Tombé).


=H. Solandra= _L’Herit._

Tall, woody herb, not unlike _Wissadula rostrata_ in general appearance.
Leaves ovate to more or less deeply 3-lobed, cordate, dentate-serrate.
Flowers pink, ½ in. across, in few-flowered terminal raceme; bracteoles
none.

Blue Nile Prov. (Geneib Assad).


=H. sudanensis= _Hochst._

Woody, with prickly stems. Leaves triangular, truncate at base, up to 6
in. long, dentate, glabrous above, glabrescent or pubescent below.
Flowers axillary, solitary or 2-3. Bracteoles 10, linear.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=H. esculentus= _Linn._ BAMIA & WEIKAH—Arab; KWEINDE (Dilling)—Nuba;
KARAN—Hameg; FOMAH (Renk)—Dinka; BARA (Ghabat El Arab)—Nuer.

Tall, erect, woody herb. Leaves long-stalked, palmately 5-lobed. Corolla
large, yellow, with purple centre. Capsule 4-6 in. long.

Cultivated. The young pods are used as a vegetable, the stem yields a
good fibre.


225 =Cienfuegosia digitata= _Cav._ GUTUB & GID EL GUTN (N. Kordn.),
MĀNAGIGA (Meshra El Zeraf) and GUTN EL KHAL—Arab.

Hairy herb or undershrub, somewhat like a small cotton plant. Leaves
5-lobed; ovary black punctate.

Kordofan Prov. (Fertangul & North Kordofan); Upper White Nile Prov.
(Meshra El Zeraf).


226 =Thespesia near Garckeana= _F. Hoffm._ NAJIKAR (J. Daier)—Nuba.

Small tree. Leaves palmate, 3½ in. broad, stellate-pubescent below.
Capsule the size of a chestnut, seeds hairy, said to be edible.

Nuba Mountains Prov. (J. Daier).


227 =Gossypium arboreum= _Linn._ =var. rosea= _Watt._

Cotton plant.

Semi-cultivated in various parts of the country.


=G. Nanking var. Roji= _Watt._

White Nile Prov.

=var. soudanensis= _Watt._

Semi-cultivated.

=var. Brouniana= _Watt._ ALAS—Dinka.

Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).

=var. Bani= _Watt._

Khartoum Prov.


=G. obtusifolium= _Roxb._ =var. africana= _Watt._

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin); White Nile, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.

=var. Wightiana= _Watt._

Darfur Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=G. hirsutum= _Linn._ GUTN AMERICANI—Arab.

Cultivated in northern provinces under irrigation and as a rain crop in
the south.


=G. peruvianum= _Cav._

Hybrids of this species are cultivated in the Central Sudan under the
name of Egyptian Cotton.


=G. cf. G. mexicanum= _Tod._

Two varieties with yellow and red flowers, respectively, are found among
native cultivation in the Fung Province.


=G. purpurascens= _Poir._ GUTN ARABI, GUTN MUMTAZ—Arab.

Found semi-cultivated in various parts of the country.


=G. herbaceum= _Linn._

Darfur Prov. (cultivated).


=G. brasiliense= _Macf._ ROKO—Zande. Kidney Cotton.

Stout, woody plant, up to 15 ft. high. Corolla, calyx, ovary and bracts
punctate. Seeds cohering; staple short. The cotton is called RAMU by the
Zande.

Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.


                            =EUPHORBIACEÆ.=


228 =Synadenium Grantii= _Hook. f._

Shrub, 8-10 ft. high. Leaves alternate, thinly fleshy, oblanceolate or
obovate, 3-7 in. long. Cymes axillary, repeatedly forked. Invol.
2-sexual or male, ¼ in. diameter, saucer-shaped with a red entire,
spreading gland-rim, from the inner edge of which spring 5 inflexed,
fringe lobes, overtopping the rim. Inside the invol. the stamens (male
flowers) arranged in 5 groups, separated by membranous walls; ovary
(female flowers) when present, central, stalked, with a rudimentary
3-crenate rim as per., 3-lobed, as most common in this family; styles 3,
deeply bifid, recurved.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


229 =Euphorbia convolvuloides= _Hochst._

Bushy herb, 6-20 in. high, tomentose. Leaves opposite, oblong or ovate-
lanceolate, ⅓-1½ in. long, acute, obliquely subcordate; stipules
subulate, free or connate. Flowering branchlets short, bearing clustered
white or tawny minute involucres; invol. differs from above by the rim-
gland which is not continuous but 4-lobed; gland-lobes entire or
crenulate. Capsules obtusely 3-angled, 1/12 in. diameter, tomentose,
separating into 3 lobes from the central axis, as in all this genus.

Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon, Obeid).


=E. hirta= _Linn._ ABULEBBEN—Arab.

Yellow hairy herb, 4-16 in. high, with milky juice as in all this genus.
Leaves opposite, obliquely lanceolate, or rhomboid-oblong, or ovate, ⅓-2
in. long, serrulate. Cymes axillary globose or divided into 2-3 globose
heads; invol. crowded, minute, rim-glands 4, with minute dorsal
appendage. Capsules globose 3-angled, puberulous, minute.

Khartoum Prov.

The root is said to be given to allay vomiting.


=E. hypericifolia= _Linn._ MABLEBEN (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; GNIOR
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Herb, 3-18 in. high. Leaves opposite, from linear-oblong to ovate, ¼-1½
in. long, usually denticulate. Cymes axillary, ⅙-½ in. diameter; few or
many-flowered. Invol. cup-shaped, minute, rim-glands minute, appendaged,
white; styles deeply bifid.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: around Matamma); Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Upper
White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Bahr El Jebel; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).


=E. scordifolia= _Jacq._ MALBEINA HAMRA & UMLEBEINA (Kordn.)—Arab.

Bushy, woolly herb. Leaves opposite, oblong or oblong-elliptic, ¼-¾ in.
long, obtuse, obliquely subcordate, serrulate. Invol. usually crowded
along axillary, leafy branchlets. Flowers much as above.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Erkowit, Soturba); Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile
Prov. (Turra); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.
(Meshra El Zeraf).


=E. granulata= _Forsk._ LIBBEYN or LIBBEIN—Arab.

Hirsute prostrate weed. Leaves opposite, oblong or oblong-obovate,
oblique at base, under ½ in. long. Infl. in short, leafy axillary
racemes. Invol. campanulate, green, minute; rim-glands 4 or 3,
appendages 2-3 lobed.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Berber Prov.;
Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad); Darfur Prov.

=var. glabrata= _Boiss._ GONOIH (Halfa Prov.)—Arab.

Leaves glabrous above, pubescent beneath. Rim-glands somewhat more
petaloid than in type.

Wadi Halfa (Islands); Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.); Kordofan Prov.


=E. polycnemoides= _Hochst._

Bushy herb, glabrous. Leaves opposite, usually minute, up to 1 in. long,
linear to linear-oblong, often falcate, mucronate, base unequal, sharply
denticulate. Invol. solitary, axillary spaced along branchlets, green or
purplish, minute; rim-glands 4, with or without a minute notched or
2-lobed appendage. Seeds 4-angled rugose.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma & Goz Regeb: J. Erimbat); Kordofan
Prov. (Obeid); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dilling); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Jur
Ghattas).


=E. ægyptiaca= _Boiss._ MALBEINA & UMLEBEINA (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Small prostrate herb. Leaves opposite, up to ½ in. long, oblong, unequal
at base, slightly toothed; stipules free usually. Infl. in short leafy
axillary racemes. Invol. minute campanulate, open down one side for
extrusion of capsules; rim-glands 4, appendages minute or obsolete.

Nubia (deserts & between Suakin & Berber); Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.
Lat.); Dongola Prov. (Dongola to Merowe); Berber Prov. (Abu Hamad, banks
of the Nile & Mesherif); Khartoum Prov. (Khartoum & Wad Shellai); Blue
Nile Prov.; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov.

Used in native medicine as a purgative.


=E. sanguinea= _Hochst._ & _Steud._

Prostrate weed. Leaves opposite, under ½ in. long, oblong or obliquely
elliptic, very oblique at base, rounded at apex, often with a red spot.
Infl. as above; invol. campanulate, minute; rim-glands 4, appendages
narrow, usually 2-3 lobed.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N. Lat.).


=E. prostrata= _Ait._

Small prostrate weed, puberulous on upper side. Leaves up to ⅓ in. long,
oblong to elliptic, more or less toothed, rounded at apex. Infl. as
above; invol. campanulate, minute; rim-glands 4, minute, with appendage
just exceeding the margin or obsolete.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N. Lat.).


=E. crotonoides= _Boiss._

Erect herb, 1-2 ft. high, with narrow wings decurrent from short, flat
petioles. Leaves alternate, except at forking of flowering branches,
linear to lanceolate, ¾-3 in. long, irregularly serrate. Flowering
branches raceme-like, 1½-8 in. long. Invol. sessile or subsessile,
solitary, woolly, pubescent; rim-glands 4, distinctly stalked, entire,
red or purple. Capsules with long, soft, spreading hairs.

Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid); Kordofan Prov.


=E. bongensis= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Bushy herb, up to 1 ft. high, with perennial rhizome. Leaves alternate,
linear, ½-1½ in. long. Invol. solitary, terminal, minute, subsessile;
rim-glands 4-5; 2-lipped or obliquely funnel-shaped. Capsules velvety.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur River, Kutshook Ali’s Zariba).


=E. arabica= _Hochst._ & _Steud._

Erect, glabrous annual. Leaves opposite, short petiolate, linear, ½-1
in. long, straight or curved. Infl. on axillary peduncle-like branchlets
or on peduncles, up to ⅓ in. long, with 2-3 invol. and sometimes one in
axil at base; invol. minute; rim-glands 4, minute, appendages
inconspicuous or none.

Red Sea Prov. (J. Waratab & 21° N. Lat.); Kassala Prov. (Goz Regeb).


=E. dracunculoides= _Lam._

Erect, glabrous annual, 3-12 in. high. Leaves opposite above, alternate
below, sessile linear or linear-lanceolate, ⅓-2 in. long. Invol.
solitary at forks or ends of branches, minute; rim-glands minute,
narrowly oblong or half-moon shaped, 2-horned.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, Suakin 21° N. Lat.).

It yields a clear oil, used as drying-oil and for burning. The fruit is
said to remove warts.


=E. acalyphoides= _Hochst._

Annual, 6-15 in. high. Leaves alternate, elliptic or elliptic-oblong,
¾-1¾ in. long; petals ¼-1¼ in. long. Peduncles axillary, shorter than
petals, bearing 1-3 sessile invol., which are minute; glands elliptic or
elliptic-oblong, pubescent.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=E. macrophylla= _Pax._

Perennial, 18 in. high. Leaves alternate, 3-5 whorled at base of umbels;
stem-leaves obovate to elliptic, 3-6 in. long, whorl-leaves varying from
oblong to rhomboid or lanceolate. Umbels terminal, 3-5 rayed, compound
or simple by abortion, with 2-3 distant flowering nodes; invol. ⅓ in.
diameter; glands 5, ⅙ in. diameter, elliptic-oblong, shortly 2-lipped.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=E. schimperiana= _Scheele._

Erect herb, ½-4 ft. high. Leaves alternate, or with a whorl of 3-5 under
the umbel, ¾-3½ in. long, linear-lanceolate or lanceolate, narrowed to
base, sessile, glabrous. Cymes terminal, 3 to many times forked,
sometimes terminating in a 3-5 rayed umbel; bracts opposite, sessile,
¼-1 in. long, triangular-ovate. Invol. solitary sessile or nearly so,
minute, cup-shaped; glands 4, minute, somewhat half-mooned shaped,
2-horned.

Fung Prov. (Bunzaga).


=E. arguta= _Soland._

Herb, 3-15 in. high. Leaves alternate, sessile, lanceolate or
oblanceolate, serrate. Umbels 3-5 rayed, terminal or axillary near the
apex; rays up to 5 in. long, cymosely 2-4 times divided. Invol.
solitary, sessile, or nearly so, minute; glands 4, minute, transversely
oblong, entire.

Nubia (Wadi Halfa).


=E. agowensis= _Hochst._

Undershrub, with herbaceous branches. Leaves alternate, with a whorl of
3 at base of umbel and opposite on its branches, elliptic-obtuse, ½-1¼
in. long, denticulate. Umbels terminal, 3-branched, 1-3 times forked or
lateral and axillary, 1-10 in. long. Invol. in cymes of 3 at ends of
umbel branches, minute; glands 4, transversely oblong, minute.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=E. cyparissioides= _Pax._

Bushy, glabrous herb, about 1 ft. high. From a perennial root stock.
Leaves alternate on stem and branches, whorled or opposed under the cyme
or umbel, sessile, linear, ⅓-1¼ in. long. Invol. solitary or in
subcapitate cymes, terminal, minute. Glands 5, rarely 7, minute, margins
straight or creniculate. Capsules much exserted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit, Deim Gudju, Niamniam-land, at River
Ibba).


=E. cuneata= _Vahl._

Woody shrub, up to 10-12 ft. high; branches horizontal, often spine-
tipped, glabrous or at first puberulous. Leaves alternate, scattered
and, on short secundary branches, tufted, usually ⅓-1 in. long, linear-
cuneate to cuneate-spathulate. Cymes umbel-like, ⅓-⅔ in. long, axillary
or terminal, with 1 or 3-5 invols. with reduced leaves under cymes and
invols. Invol. 1/5-1/4 in. diameter, broadly cup-shaped; glands 5,
peltate, concave, elliptic or suborbicular, about 1/12 in. diameter.
Capsules erect, ¼ in. diameter, puberulous.

Red Sea Prov. (J. Kuureb, J. Waratab, sea coast, 21° N. Lat., Karora).


=E. nubica= _N.E. Br._ JAGIA (J. Daier)—Nuba.

Unarmed green, early-leafless shrub, up to 6 ft. high; branches
alternate, cylindrical; leaf-scars prominent. Leaves not seen. Umbels
terminal of 5-7 simple rays, about ½ in. long; bracts early deciduous,
oblong, acute, ½ in. long, whorled at base of umbel, and orbicular-
obovate, ⅙ in. long, paired below the invols. Invol. ¼ in. diameter,
shallowly cup-shaped; lobes scarcely toothed or ciliate, but sometimes
bifid; glands 4, transversely elliptic or orbicular. Capsules ¼ in.
diameter, much exserted.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Nuba Mts. Prov.
(J. Daier); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Duli Konga, 7,500 ft.).


=E. consobrina= _N.E. Br._

Shrub of habit much as above. Leaves soon deciduous, sessile, linear-
lanceolate, acute, ⅙-¼ in. long. Umbel of 3, or less, simple rays, up to
½ in. long, terminal, based by a whorl of leaves. Invol. solitary, about
⅙ in. diameter, shallowly cup-shaped, the 5 lobes subquadrate,
subentire, slightly ciliate; glands as above. Capsules slightly
exserted, curved to one side.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Wadi Teeke, between Suakin and Berber).


=E. scoparia= _N.E. Br._ KURKABAN & SHAGAR EL SIM (Baggara)?—Arab;
IMGEIL (Dilling)?—Nuba.

Unarmed tree, 15-25 ft. high; branchlets alternate, abundant, green,
cylindrical, fleshy, ¼-½ in. thick, marked with leaf scars. Leaves
caducous, alternate, scattered below, clustered at ends of branchlets,
linear, sessile, about ½ in. long. Invols. in dense sessile clusters,
about ⅙ in. in diameter at tips of branches, cup-shaped, minute; lobes
5, ovate subciliate; glands 5, minute, transversely elliptic, entire.
Ovary erect on stout pedicel as long as invol.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Dakhila, south of Roseires); Nuba Mts.
Prov. (Dilling)?


=E. venenifica= _Trém._ SHAGAR EL SIM—Arab; RIS (Tagele)—Nuba;
JIANGO—Zande.

Bushy shrub, up to 7 or 8 ft. high, with fleshy, cylindrical branches
armed with conical prickles. Leaves deciduous, 3-11 in. long, narrowly
lanceolate to oblong-cuneate, tapering into the short petiole. Cymes
solitary in axils of spine tubercles, ½-¾ in. long including the short
peduncle, once or twice forked, the branches bearing 3 invols.; central
invol. sessile, lateral short pedicellate, about 1/7 in. diameter, cup-
shaped, lobes 5, broadly cuneate, fringed at top, rim-glands 1/12 in.
diameter, transversely oblong. Capsules deeply 3-lobed, erect, about ⅓
in. diameter.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas & Abu Gurun’s Zariba, Mittu: Dukutu, Niamniam-land); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).

Used by natives for poisoning arrows.


=E. Teke= _Schweinfth._

Very large tree; young branches fleshy, 4-angled, about ½-¾ in.
diameter, armed with geminate, diverging stipular spines, about ⅙ in.
long, blackish. Leaves glabrous, elongated cuneate-obovate, 3-12 in.
long, tapering into the ⅓-1 in. long petioles. Cymes axillary, sessile,
of 2-4 peduncle-like branches, 1½-2½ in. long, each with 2, about ½ in.
long branches, each end ending in a solitary sessile invol.; bracts
under invol. nearly ¼ in. long, ovate, deciduous. Invol. under ½ in.
diameter, broadly cup-shaped; lobes 5, broadly cuneate, fringed; glands
5, transversely elliptic-oblong; ovary erect, glabrous.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Yuru and Diagbe Rivers).


=E. triaculeata= _Forsk._ =var. triacantha= _N.E. Br._

Spiny, succulent, leafless bushy plant, 5-20 in. high; stems with
branches about ½ in. thick, usually 3-5 angled, angles often prominent,
with deep notches forming triangular teeth, each margined with a horny
shield bearing 1 straight needle-like spine up to 1 in. long and 2 small
prickles at its base. Cymes small, solitary in axils of teeth, with 3
invols.; bracts scale-like. Invol. minute; lobes 5-6 transversely
rectangular, fringed; glands united into a 5-lobed spreading rim; ovary
not exserted.

Red Sea Prov. (J. Waratab & Khor Seterra).


=E. monacantha= _Pax._

Succulent, much branched, very spiny, leafless plant, 4-8 in. high;
stems about ½ in. thick, with several spiral series of tubercles or
tuberculate angles, each tubercle bearing 1 spreading spine ⅓-¾ in.
long, with or without a pair of minute prickles at its base on a 3-lobed
horny shield. Leaves scale-like, deciduous. Invols. 3 together in axils
of the shields, sessile or nearly so, with a pair of oblong toothed
bracts, cup-shaped, about 6⅛ in. diameter, lobes 5, cuneate; glands
variable contiguous or separated; ovary sessile.

Red Sea Province (Suakin).


=E. Thi= _Schweinfth._ ANKHAU—Hadendowa; DAMBOTIT—Rashida.

Succulent, spiny, leafless bush, 2-4 ft. high; branches erect, up to
about 2 in. diam., 4-6 angled, constricted at intervals of 1-2½ in.;
angles compressed, lobed by the constrictions with continuous horny
margins; spines varying from ⅙-¾ in., in pairs, diverging, ⅙-½ in.
apart. Cymes solitary in axils of spines, subsessile, with 3 invols.;
bracts small, ovate. Invol. ⅙ in. diam., lobes 5, cuneate, fringed;
glands 5, transversely oblong. Caps. ⅛ in. diam., partly exserted.

Nubia (Wadi Teeke, between Suakin & Berber); Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat).


=E. abyssinica= _Gmelin._ SHAGAR EL SIM—Arab; HEID—Hadendowa.

Tree with succulent, leafless branches, which are ascending, forming a
large crown and up to 8- (usually 6-) angled; angles scolloped or
crenate owing to frequent constrictions; spines continuous on top of
angles, in groups of 5 or 2, divaricate, about ½ in. long. Cymes crowded
at top of branchlets; invol. with 5 transversely-elliptic, yellow
glands. Capsules with a distinct 3-lobed calyx at base, crimson streaked
with white when ripe.

Red Sea Prov.: Between Suakin & Berber; Bahr El Jebel (Sudd country?).


=E. Murieli= _N.E. Br._ SHAGAR EL SIM—Arab.

Large tree with ascending, leafless and spineless branches, forming a
large crown; branches slightly constricted at regular or irregular
distances; constrictions all of same diameter; angles 4, sometimes 5,
margins even; spines 0; spine shields horny, oblong, ¼-½ in. apart, not
connected by horny border. Leaves rudimentary, minute. Cymes numerous at
top of branchlets; pedicels ½-1 in. long bearing, on branches ¼-⅓ in.
long, 3 invols.; bracts minute, suborbicular; invol. ¼ in. diameter;
lobes 5, short; glands 5 erect, contiguous or nearly so, reniform,
forming a lip. Capsules exserted, curved to one side, ⅓ in. diameter.

Bahr El Jebel.


=E. Erythrææ= _N.E. Br._

Small, leafless, succulent, spiny tree; branches ascending, candelabrum-
like, 3-4 or 5-7 angled, irregularly constricted; angles wing-like, up
to about 1 in. broad, straight or wavy; spines in pairs up to ⅓ in.
long, on suborbicular shields close together but not connected. Flowers
and fruit not known.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber: Harassa valley).


=E. calycina= _N.E. Br._

Succulent, spiny, leafless tree, 30 ft. high; branches 4-angled, wing-
like, faintly sinuate, with small central core; constrictions slight,
5-7 in. apart or more; spines up to ⅙ in. long, in pairs ½-¾ in. apart,
on oblong or suborbic. shields which are not connected by horny border.
Leaves scale-like. Cymes on peduncles ½-¾ in. long, bearing a central,
sessile, male invol. and 2 lateral hermaphr., on short branches. Invol.
about ¼ in. diameter, shallowly cup-shaped; lobes 5, broad, fringed;
glands 5, subcontiguous, transverse reniform, 2-lipped with ends
decurved. Ovary exserted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek, Mittu-land: at Legbi).


=E. Candelabrum= _Trémaut._ SHAGAR EL SIM—Arab; AURI (J. Daier)—Nuba;
BAKUNGI & FUFUMI—Bari; KAKOB—Bongo; BOL & BUAL (Bahr El Jebel)—Dinka;
BULL—Nuer.

Armed tree with stem up to 3 ft. diameter, forming a large crown of
candelabrum-like habit; branchlets fleshy, 3-4 or 5-angled, not wing-
like, constricted at intervals; core thicker than in preceding; spines
geminate, diverging, up to ⅙ in. long, on rounded horny cushions which
are not decurrent. Flowers and fruit not known.

Southern Sudan (on poor soil or rock).

The milky juice is used for poisoning arrows.


230 =Bridelia scleroneuroides= _Pax._ APIAT (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka;
INZI—Golo.

Shrub or small tree; branchlets yellowish hairy. Leaves alternate,
oblong-elliptic to oblong-lanceolate, 1-5 in. long, pubescent above when
young, softly and densely pubescent beneath; lateral nerves straight to
the margin. Flowers monœcious; male flowers small, numerous, subsessile
in leaf-axils; sepals 5, ovate; petals 5, broad-ovate, toothed at apex;
stamens 5; female flowers fewer or solitary: sepals as in male; petals
elliptic-ovate, thick, slightly bifid; styles 2, bifid. Drupe globose, ¼
in. diameter, 2-celled.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas; Khor Tela).


=B. ferruginea= _Benth._ =var. orientalis= _Hutchinson._

Shrub or small tree; branchlets rusty, hairy. Leaves elliptic, short-
acuminate, 2-4 in. long, pubescent on nerves and veins below; lateral
nerves 11-13, unbranched to margin. Male flowers: sepals 5, ovate-
lanceolate, slightly hooded, pubescent outside with long adpressed
hairs; petals 5, minute, obovate, toothed; stamens 5; disk thick,
wrinkled. Female flowers: sepals as in male; petals lanceolate, acute;
disk bottle-shaped, enclosing ovoid ovary, pubescent; styles 2,
bipartite. Fruit ovoid-oblong, 1-celled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Okel; Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River);
Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=B. micrantha= _Baill._

Densely crowned tree, 20-40 ft. high; branchlets rusty-tomentose when
young. Leaves oblong-elliptic to obovate, 2-7 in. long, shining above;
lateral nerves 8-16, ascending and finally forming a marginal nerve.
Male flowers small, short-stalked; sepals 5, triangular, pubescent at
base; petals 5, obovate-cuneate, 3-lobed or toothed. Female flowers
sessile; sepals as above; petals ovate entire; disk almost enclosing the
ovoid ovary, densely pilose outside; styles 2, 2-lobed. Fruit ovoid, ⅙-¼
in. diameter, 1-celled.

Mongalla Prov, (Yei River).

A food plant of the African Silk Worm (_Anaphe infracta_) in Uganda. The
timber is white and very durable.


231 =Megabaria ugandensis= _Hutchinson._ KAPAH—Kaliko.

Tall tree; branchlets glabrous. Leaves alternate, clustered towards ends
of branchlets, broadly elliptic, 3-11 in. long, glabrous. Infl.
diœcious; male in glabrous panicles at ends of branchlets, axis 6-8 in.
long, bracts ovate-triangular, up to ⅙ in. long; spikelets up to ½ in.
long, each with a membranous bract at base; calyx 5-partite, lobes
broad-ovate; petals 5, small, elliptic; stamens 5; disk-glands 5. Female
infl. a panicle of racemes; calyx and petals as in male; disk cupular;
ovary and fruit ovoid.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Deim Guju in Dar Fertit); Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River).


232 =Amanoa Schweinfurthii= _Baker_ & _Hutchinson._

Monœcious, glabrous shrub, about 10 ft. high. Leaves alternate,
oblanceolate or oblong-elliptic, slightly emarginate, shining above, 3-4
in. long. Flowers in axillary spicate clusters on short lateral leafy
branches. Male flowers several in each head; sepals 5, ovate; petals 5,
short, scale-like. Female flowers solitary in each head.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mayob).


233 =Andrachne aspera= _Spreng._

Monœcious diffuse, scabrous herb, about 1 ft. high, from a perennial
root stock. Leaves alternate, orbicular or sub-reniform, ¼-¾ in. broad.
Flowers axillary; male flower fasciculate; sep. ovate-lanceolate,
minute, 5-6; pet. 5-6, equalling sep., lanceolate; disk-glands 5-6,
opposite petals; female flower solitary; sepals longer than in male,
oblong-lanceolate; pet. very small, lanceolate; disk-glands 5; styles 3,
2-partite; ovary 3-celled. Capsule globose, ⅛ in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, Suakin, 21° N. Lat.).


234 =Antidesma venosum= _Tul._ YUKDASHI—Golo.

Diœcious, willow-like shrub or small tree. Leaves alternate, elliptic or
oblanceolate, up to 6 in. long, glabrous or pubescent above and thinly
pubescent to tomentose below. Male spikes up to 6 in. long, silky; calyx
3-5 partite; pet. 0; stamens 3-5. Female racemes 1-5 in. long. Flowers
pedicellate, ellipsoid, glabrous about ⅓ in. long.

Damp places; Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dar Nuba); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (moist ground near Khors: Dar Fertit, Niamniam-land and
Jur); Mongalla Prov. (Gigging).

The juice is said to be substitute for collyrium.


235 =Mæsobotrya floribunda= _Schweinfth._

Diœcious tree or shrub. Leaves alternate, elliptic, 3-6 in. long,
shortly acuminate, margin remotely repand denticulate; pet. ½-1¼ in.
long, stout. Male racemes crowded in leaf-axils, about 2 in. long; calyx
5-6 lobed, minute; pet. 0; stamens 5-6 free; disk-glands large, fleshy.
Female racemes solitary or geminate, axillary, about 3 in. long; cal.
lobes ovate, imbricate; disk cupular, short ovary ovoid, styles 2,
short, bilobed. Flowers ovoid, ¼ in. long, purple.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land, Assika River).

Wood yellowish white, works well, density 0.651; suitable for joinery.


236 =Hymenocardia acida= _Tul._ GARE & GERE—Bongo; KWANGE & GARA—Golo;
AKAN—Jur; BAGBODI—Zande.

Tall, diœcious, apetalous shrub; branchlets rusty puberulous. Leaves
alternate, oblanceolate to elliptic-oblong, up to 3½ in. long. Male
flower in catkin-like spikes, up to 2½ in. long; cal. cupular, shortly
5-lobed, pinkish; stamens 5; anthers with a golden gland on the back
near the top. Female flower in axillary short racemes; calyx 5-8
partite, pubescent; ovary glabrous, winged; styles 2. Fruit 2-winged,
much like that of a small maple.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Gurgus forest); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Dinka &
Mittu-lands); Bahr El Jebel (Mongalla Prov. southwards).

The bark yields a red tan; it is also used by the Bongos as an
antiseptic.


237 =Drypetes (Cyclostemon) Mildbrædii= _Hutchinson._

Large diœcious, apetalous shrub; bark light-grey; branchlets angular,
puberulous. Leaves alternate, oblong or elliptic, shortly acuminate, 4-8
in. long, midrib and lat. nerves pubescent. Flowers fasciculate on
2-year-old wood; pedicels very short. Male flower sep. 4, suborbicular,
⅙ in. diam.; stamens 10, free, inserted round the fleshy, lobed disk.
Female flower sep. 4, a little larger than male; disk annular, thick;
ovary slightly bilobed; stigmas flat, 2-fid.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Yuru River).


238 =Phyllanthus inflatus= _Hutchinson._ =sp. nov.=

Leafy branchlets arising from short scaly branchlets. Leaves ovate-
elliptic, 1¼ in. long, ¾ in. broad, glaucous. Fruit large, bladder-like,
1½ in. long, crustaceous; stalks ½ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Lado District: Kagi Ko, Yei River).


=P. reticulatus= _Poir._ KOROPONGO—Golo.

Erect or scrambling, monœcious, apetalous shrub, at length nearly
glabrous. Leaves alternate, oblong or elliptic, ½-1¼ in. long; stip.
lanceolate, acute. Male flower small, axillary, fascicled; sep. 5,
ovate-elliptic, 1-nerved; stamens 5, 2 or 3 of the filaments connate,
the others free and shorter; disk-glands 5, obovate. Female flower
solitary or few; sep. as in male and disk also; ovary depressed globose;
styles 3 short, erect. Fruit ¼ in. diam., fleshy or coriaceous.

Berber Prov. (Atbara: El Leya, Zeidab); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.
(Wad El Haddad); Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Wau, Mittu-land: Mvolo, Niamniam-land); Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post); Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).

The roots yield a red dye. The leaves have diuretic and cooling
properties.


=P. floribundus= _Muell. Arg._

Armed monœcious trailing or climbing shrub. Leaves alternate, ovate or
ovate-elliptic, mucronate, ¾-3 in. long. Racemes fascicled in axils of
branchlets, up to 2 in. long, bearing clusters of 2-3 male and 1 female
flower. Male flower sep. 5, oblong, minute, disk-glands 5, fleshy;
stamens 5, free. Female flower sep. soon deciduous; disk cupular; ovary
ellipsoid; styles 4-5, bilobed. Fruit depressed globose, small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Diagbe
River).


=P. discoideus= _Muell. Arg._

Shrub to tall tree, diœcious. Leaves ovate-elliptic to obovate-
oblanceolate, 1-4 in. long. Male flowers numerous, in axillary
fascicles; bracts large orbicular, deciduous; sep. 4, obovate-oblong,
very small; disk fleshy entire; stamens 4, free. Female flower axillary,
geminate; sep. 4, larger than male; disk fleshy; ovary ellipsoid.
Capsule 3-4 lobed, ⅓ in. diam.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=P. capillaris= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Whitish pubescent monœcious shrub, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves obovate or
elliptic-obovate, ⅓-1 in. long, glaucous beneath. Male flower axillary,
fascicled; pedicels ¾ in. long; sep. 5, minute, obovate; glands 5,
fleshy; stamens 5, free. Female flower mostly solitary; sep. 4-5, ovate-
elliptic, minute; disk saucer-shaped; styles 3, bipartite. Fruit
depressed, globose, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=P. nummulariæfolius= _Poir._

Small monœcious shrub. Leaves obovate or rounded-obovate, ¼-¾ in. long,
otherwise as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land): Sueh River & Mt. Baginze); Bahr El
Jebel (Madi).


=P. pentandrus= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Woody monœcious herb, 18 in. high. Leaves oblong-lanceolate or
lin.-lanc., up to ¾ in. long. Male flower axillary in lower leaves, 2-3
together; sep. 5, ovate, glands 5, flat; stamens 5, free. Female flower
solitary in axils of upper leaves; sep. and disk as male; styles shortly
bifid. Capsule depressed-globose, minute.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin 21° N. Lat.); Kordofan Prov. (Rahad, Obeid, etc.);
White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé).


=P. amarus= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Monœcious herb, 1 ft. high. Leaves oblong or elliptic, ⅙-½ in. long; one
male and one female flower in each leaf axil. Male flower sep. 5, ovate,
minute, glands small; stamens 3, filaments connate. Female flower sep.
larger than male; disk 5-lobed; styles 3, short, bifid. Capsule
depressed 3-lobed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=P. maderaspatensis= _Linn._

Erect monœcious herb or undershrub; flower branchlets almost winged.
Leaves lin.-lanceolate or oblanceolate, up to 1½ in. long; stip.
lanceolate and auricled about ⅛ in. long. Male and female flower
sometimes together in leaf axils, or female solitary, much larger than
males; ped. 1/12 in. Male flower, sep. 6, oblong-lanceolate, minute;
disk-glands 6, flat; stamens 3, filaments connate. Female flower, sep.
6, 2-seriate ovate-elliptic; disk of 6 flat glands; styles 3, bifid.
Capsule 3-lobed, ⅛ in. diam.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: woods north of
Matamma); Fung Prov. (Roseires & Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Haraza); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra
El Zeraf southwards); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).

An infusion of the leaves is used for headaches. Cattle eat the leaves.


=P. prostrata= _Welw._

Small prostrate, monœcious herb. Leaves elliptic, spinescent at apex, ¼
in. long. Male flower axillary and geminate in lower parts; sep. 6,
oblong, minute; glands 6, orbicular; stamens 3, filam. connate. Female
flower solitary in upper parts; sepals 6, in 2 rows oblong; disk
annular; styles 3, bifid. Capsule depressed globose, ⅙ in. diam.

Khartoum Prov.


=P. odontadenius= _Muell. Arg._

Monœcious annual, 2-3 ft. high; branches winged. Leaves oblong, ⅓-¾ in.
long. Male flower axillary in lower leaf-axils, few together; sep. 6,
oblong, minute; glands minute; stamens 3, filam. connate. Female flower
solitary in upper leaf axils; sep. 6, biseriate, larger than male; disk
annular crenate; styles 3, bilobed. Capsule enclosed by whitish
persistent sepals.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=P. Niruri= _Linn._ ERGANA (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Erect branched monœcious herb, 1 ft. high, with fine feathery foliage.
Leaves oblong or oblong-elliptic, ¼-½ in. long. Male flower solitary in
lower parts of branchlets; sep. and glands 6 resp., small; stamens 3,
filaments connate. Female flower solitary in upper parts of branchlets;
sep. 6, larger than male; disk flat, about 10-toothed. Capsule globose-
trilobed, 1/10 in. diam.

Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol): Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El
Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).

The leaves are used medicinally for various disorders.


=P. rotundifolius= _Klein._

Monœcious herb, 1 ft. high. Leaves rounded-obovate, under ½ in. long.
Two or three male and one female flower together in each axil. Male,
sep. 6, glands 6; stamens 3, filaments connate. Female, sep. larger than
male, ovate; disk crenulate, small; ovary depressed globose.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin 21° N. Lat.).


239 =Fluggea microcarpa= _Blume._ DABALAB (Blue Nile)—Arab; MALI—Hameg;
BUGGULTYEN (Dilling)—Nuba.

Diœcious, apetalous shrub or small tree, growing in moist ground. Leaves
alternate, elliptic or obovate, obtusely pointed or emarginate, up to 2½
in. long. Male flowers numerous in axillary fascicles; ped. ⅙ in.; sep.
5, unequal, largest 1/12 in. long, obovate; disk-glands large and fleshy
with 3 or 4 depressions on outside; stamens 5, free. Female flower also
in axillary fascicles, numerous; sep. as male; disk annular; ovary
ovoid; styles 3, connate at base, bilobed, rarely absent. Fruit white,
depressed globose about ⅙ in diam.

Kassala Prov. (Gendua River & Goz Regeb); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post);
Upper White Nile Prov. (Tonga & Kodok); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-
land); Bahr El Jebel.

Wood reddish-yellow, close-grained, strong and durable. The bark is
astringent and is used as a fish poison.


240 =Croton lobatus= _Linn._ UMDILEIDMĀN (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Tall monœcious woody herb. Leaves digitately 3-5 partite, 1-4 in. long,
alternate, crenate, pet. up to 4 in. long. Racemes axillary and
terminal, up to 5 in. long, bearing female flower below, male above, 2
ft. to each bract. Male flower, sep. 5, greenish, minute; pet. 5;
stamens 10-13. Female flower, sep. 5, ¼ in. long, lin.-lanceolate,
glandular-hairy; pet. 5, represented by a minute hair each; disk shortly
5-lobed; styles 3, free, 6-7 lobed. Capsule ¼ in. long.

Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri); White Nile Prov. (rocky hills);
Kordofan Prov. (between Taiara & Gefil).


=C. polytrichus= _Pax._

Shrub? Monœcious; branchlets rusty tomentose. Leaves oblong-ovate or
obl.-elliptic, acuminate, biglandular at base, 1-2 in. long, stellate
pubescent. Racemes stellately pubescent terminal, 4 in. long, upper ⅔
male, female below. Male flower, sep. 5, minute; pet. 5, minute; disk-
glands fleshy, suborbicular; stamens 15. Female flower, sep. 5; pet. a
tuft of hairs; disk undulately lobed; styles 3, bilobed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Abu Gurun’s Zariba).


=C. niloticus= _Muell. Arg._

Diœcious shrub; stems and branches clothed with scaly pubescence. Leaves
dimorphic—of the young branchlets broadly ovate or ovate-rhomboid, 2-4
in. long, digitately 5-nerved; of the older branches 1 ft. long and
broad deeply cordate, 7-nerved; pet. 1-6 in. long. Male flower not
known; female racemes axillary and terminal, 3½ in. long; sep. 5,
minute; pet. 0; disk saucer-shaped, fleshy; styles deeply bilobed.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=C. gratissimus= _Burch._ NIMARDAK (J. Daier)—Nuba.

Large monœcious shrub, twigs and under surface of leaves covered with
silvery scaly tomentum. Leaves alternate ovate-lanceolate, 1-2 in. long.
Racemes terminal, up to 2½ in. long, bisexual. Male flower, sep. and
pet. 5, ovate 1/10 in. long, scaly; disk-glands thick, opposite the
sepals; stamens 10-5. Female flower, sep. and pet. 5; disk minute; ovary
densely clothed with fringed scales. Capsule ⅛ in. long, slightly
3-lobed.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Daier, Talodi: Um Qualeet).

A decoction is drunk for malaria, and also used as a massage lotion in
cases of fever.


=C. leuconeurus= _Pax._

Monœcious tree, 15-20 ft. high. Leaves ovate or elliptic-ovate, 2-5 in.
long, crenate-serrate with short stipitate glands between the teeth.
Racemes terminal, interrupted. Female flowers few, mixed with males.
Male flower hairy; sep. and pet. 5, 1/10 in. long; glands small and
fleshy; stamens about 18. Female flower, sep. 5, pet. rudimentary,
pilose; disk fleshy; ovary globose densely tomentose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Mvolo).


241 =Jatropha tuberosa= _Pax._

Monœcious, 1-2 ft. high; root tuberous. Leaves sessile, upper deeply
3-lobed, 6 in. long, lower lanceolate, 3-5 in. long, serrulate. Cymes
terminal, dichotomous. Female flower terminating each axis, male
lateral; bracts ¼ in. long, glandular-toothed; sep. 5, pet. 5, all
minute; glands 5; stamens 8 in 2 series, 3 inner filaments connate.
Female flower, sep. and pet. 5, larger than male; disks 5-lobed, lobes
toothed; styles bifid.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Mangob).


=J. melanosperma= _Pax._

Monœcious herb, 18 in. high. Leaves deeply 3-lobed to subentire 2½-6 in.
long, serrulate. Cymes small; flowers crowded, much as above; seeds
black, shining ¼ in. long; the bracts are smaller and eglandular.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-land).


=J. lobata= _Muell. Arg._

Monœcious undershrub, about 1 ft. high. Leaves digitately 3-5 lobed,
1½-3 in. long and broad, serrate. Cymes few-flowered, 1 in. diam.;
bracts ¼ in. long, gland-toothed; sep. and pet. minute, gland-toothed;
glands small; stamens 8. Female flower, sep. and pet. larger than male;
disk 5-lobed. Capsule ½ in. long, buff-coloured.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, etc.); Kordofan Prov. (Katul Gumbara).


=J. aceroides= _Hutchinson._

Small shrub. Leaves digitately 5-lobed, 1-4 in. long, coarsely dentate.
Cymes few-flowered. Male flower, sep. 1/10 in.; pet. 1/5 in. long;
glands large round contiguous; stamens 8; filaments partially connate.
Female flower, sep. larger than male; pet. 0; disk deeply 5-lobed. Fruit
not known.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Ashat, Khor Gwob).


=J. Curcas= _Linn._ HABB-EL-MELUK (Egypt)—Arab.

Sappy shrub. Leaves 5-lobed or entire, ovate-rounded, 3½-5½ in. long and
wide; pet. 3-7 in. long. Cymes shorter than leaves. Male flower, sep.
1/7 in. long; pet. 2/9 in. long, pilose within, connate below; disk-
glands cylindric; stamens 8, 3 inner connate. Female flower, sep. larger
than male; pet. ¼ in. long, pilose; disk deeply 5-lobed. Capsule
ellipsoid, 1 in. long.

Introduced: Khartoum Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Renk); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Deim Zubeir, planted by Marchand); Bahr El Jebel.

It is used as a hedge-plant. The seeds are poisonous and act as a
violent purgative. An oil is extracted from the seeds which is used for
making soap.


=J. glandulosa= _Vahl._

Shrub, 3 ft. high. Leaves 3-lobed, orbicular in outline, 1-2½ in. long
and wide, hairy, glandular-dentate; stip. reduced to a mass of sessile
glands. Cymes 2 in. diam.; bracts glandular-toothed. Male flower, sep.
pubescent, glandular-toothed, minute; pet. 1/5 in. long, connate lower
⅔; disk-glands fleshy; stamens 8, filaments connate half-way. Female
flower, sep. pubescent, gland-toothed; pet. 0; disk 5-lobed, fleshy.

Between Suakin & Kassala (J. Iskeneib).


=J. gallabatensis= _Schweinfth._

Shrub, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves simple to 3-lobed, 2-3 in. long; fimbriate-
glandular-serrate; stip. fimbriate, glandular. Cymes terminal, 1¼ in.
diam.; bracts ¼ in. long, stipitate-glandular. Male fl.: sep. toothed,
minute; pet. ⅙ in. long; disk-glands flat; st. 8, 3 inner connate. Fem.
fl.: sep. glandular-fimbriate, ⅙ in. long; pet. 5, ¼ in. long; disk
5-lobed. Seeds pale, ⅓ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=J. Schweinfurthii= _Pax._

Densely tomentose herb. Leaves 3-lobed to middle, 3-6 in. long, serrate.
Cymes corymbose; peduncle up to 3 in. long. Male fl.: crowded; sep. and
pet. 5, small, obovate; disk-glands obovate; st. 8, 3 inner connate.
Fem. fl.: sep. lanceolate, pubescent outside, small; pet. free, ⅙ in.
long, disk 5-lobed. Caps. tomentose, ½ in. long; seeds ⅓ in. long,
shining.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Bongo: Gir); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi).


=J. æthiopica= _Muell. Arg._

Soft, fulvous-haired herb, 9 in. high. Leaves 3-partite, up to 4 in.
long and broad, sharply serrulate; stip. glandular-fimbriate. Cymes 1½
in. diam. on 1½ in. long, stout peduncles. Male fl.: sep. small, toothed
above; pet. free, small; st. 8, free. Fem. fl.: sep. ⅙ in. long,
fimbriate; pet. 1/5 in. long, free; disk 5-lobed, ovary ellipsoid.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur).


242 =Manniophyton africanum= _Muell. Arg._

Diœcious shrub or climber; branches scabrous-stellate. Leaves alt., from
ovate to 2-3 lobed, 3½-6 in. long; basal nerves 5; pet. up to 4 in.;
stip. rigid, subulate, small. Male panicles solitary or 2-3 together in
upper axils, up to 10 in. long, rough stellate-hairy; fl. clustered;
calyx lobes 5 triangular, ⅛ in. long; pet. 5 connate, glabrous, 1/7 in.
long; disk glands small; st. 17-20, free. Fem. panicle smaller and fewer
flowered than male; cal. as male; cor. tomentose outside; disk absent.
Caps. deeply trilobed, ab. 1 in. long, rusty hairy.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: near Um Yuru River).


243 =Caperonia serrata= _Presl._ LASAKWA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

An erect, monœcious, hispid annual. Leaves narrow-lanceolate, sharply
serrate, 2-4 in. long, glabrous or nearly so. Racemes axillary 2-4 in.
long, nearly glabrous; upper fl. male, lower fem., all solitary to a
bract. Male fl.: calyx lobes 5, ovate-triangular; pet. 5, spathulate-
oblong, subequal; st. 10, connate below, 2-seriate above, disk 0. Fem.
fl.: sep. 8-10, unequal, inner larger; pet. 5, shorter than inner sep.
Caps. ¼ in. wide; accrescent sepals 1/10-1/8 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White
Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.; Sobat
River (Nasser); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Abu Gurun’s Zariba).


244 =Chrozophora plicata= _A. Juss._ =var.= (α) =typica= _Prain._ TERBA
(Blue Nile), AKASA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; GHANEM (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka.

Prostrate branching herb, with thick root stock. Leaves nearly orbicular
or subtrilobed, margin undulate, plicate, ab. 1 in. long, woolly.
Racemes monœcious, axillary dense, upper fl. male. Male fl. calyx
5-lobed valvate; pet. 5, pink; st. 12-15 connate below, 3-seriate above.
Fem. fl.: calyx 5-lobed, pet. 5; disk-glands alt. with petals. Caps.
3-coccous, red-purple, ⅓ in. wide, pubescent.

Nubia; Dongola Prov.; On river banks and depressions on cotton soil in
most parts of the Sudan; Blue Nile Prov. (Wad Medani, Sennar, Abu
Surga); White Nile Prov. (Geteina & Salati); Kordofan Prov.; Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Nuer District).

=var.= (β) =obliguifolia= _Prain._

Leaves up to 2 in. Petals yellow.

Nubia; Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov. (near Shendi); Khartoum Prov.; Blue
Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.

The fruit yields a blueish dye. A strong fibre is yielded by this plant
but it is not easily detachable. The seeds and leaves have purgative
properties.


=C. oblongifolia= _A. Juss._

Bushy white or tawny herb or undershrub. Leaves ovate-rhomboid or oblong
to lanceolate, margins sublobed, 1-4 in. long. Racemes as above. Male
fl.: calyx as above; pet. yellowish-white; st. 5-10, 1-2 seriate. Fem.
fl. much as above, but pet. linear. Caps. 2-coccous, blue-purple, ½
wide, scaly and with fringed margins.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (hills & sea-coast).


=C. brocchiana= _Vis._ =var.= (α) =typica= _Prain._ AGASSIR (Kordn.) &
TARBA (Darfur)—Arab.

Woolly herb or undershrub. Leaves rhomboid or ovate, ¾-1½ in. long,
margin undulate, often 3-lobed, velvety. Racemes very dense, sessile.
Male fl.: calyx pubescent; pet. yellow; st. 5-10, 1-2 seriate. Fem. fl.:
sep. and pet. ¼ in. long. Caps. 3-coccous, white, tinged violet, ⅓ in.
wide, scaly.

Nubia; Dongola Prov. (Debba); Kassala Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile
Prov. (Sennar); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad, Goghan); Darfur Prov.; Upper
White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).

=var.= (β) =Hartmanni= _Schwfth._ ATTARR (Kordn.)—Arab.

Leaves rather larger, 1-2 in. long, margin distinctly 3-lobed; long
spreading stellate hairs on both surfaces.

Berber Prov. (Saggaddi); Between Atbara & Red Sea Prov.; Kordofan Prov.


245 =Manihot utilissima= _Pohl._ BABWA (sweet var.) & BAZMANGI (bitter
var.)—Zande.

The Manioc or Cassava.

Shrub or tall woody herb with tuberous roots and 3-7 lobed leaves.

Cultivated on the Bahr El Jebel and the southern portion of the Bahr El
Ghazal.

It is cultivated for its tubers which are eaten when cooked. The juice
of the uncooked tuber is poisonous. The tubers also yield tapioca.


246 =Cephalocroton cordofanus= _Hochst._

Monœcious undershrub, highly aromatic when young. Stems and leaves
stellate- and often glandular-pubescent when young. Leaves alternate,
ovate-cordate, dentate, ½-2 in. long. Male perianth 4-lobed, hairy, st.
8; fem. perianth 4-lobed, lobes bi-tri-pinnatipartite, ovary 3-lobed,
tomentose, styles 3, many times divided.

Nubia; Kassala Prov. (North of Meharrakat & Gedaref, Matamma); Atbara
River (Hillet Idris); Fung Prov. (Roseires, Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Jebel.


247 =Erythrococca bongensis= _Pax._

Diœcious, apetalous shrub, 2-6 ft. high. Leaves alt., short-petioled,
ovate, base cuneate, margin obscurely crenate, 1-2 in. long; stipules
accrescent, usually spinulose. Male fl. minute, in sessile glomerules;
per. 3-lobed; sta. 9-12; fem. fl. not known.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gurfala).


=E. africana= _Prain._

Diœcious shrub; bud-scales persistent. Leaves alt., short-petioled,
ovate, acuminate, 2-2½ in. long, margin faintly crenate; stipules
minute, scarious. Fl. small, in slender-peduncled racemes. Male fl. per.
4-lobed, green; st. 24, filaments shorter than anthers. Fem. fl. per.
deeply 2-lobed. Ovary usually 2-celled; stigmas connate at base,
papillose. Caps. didymous, rarely 3-coccous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


=E. flaccida= _Prain._

Shrub or small tree; bud-scales persistent. Leaves ovate, acuminate,
base cuneate, denticulate, pubescent; stip. scarious, minute. Fl. small,
in slender-peduncled racemes, male up to ½ in. long, female 1¼ in. long,
12-16 flowered.

Male per. 4-lobed; st. ab. 34; fem. per. 2-lobed; ovary 2-celled,
stigmas linear-ovate, at length recurved. Caps. didymous; seeds with red
aril.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River); Fung
Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


248 =Micrococca mercurialis= _Benth._

Sparingly hirsute annual, ½-2 ft. high. Leaves alt., except the lowest,
petioles ½-⅔ in. long; limb oblong or ovate or ovate-lanceolate, 1-2 in.
long, margin bluntly toothed. Racemes slender, axillary, 2-3 in. long.
Male fl. minute, per. 3-lobed; st. usually 6, 2-seriate, sometimes up to
20, multiseriate; fem. per. 3-partite; styles short, fimbriate. Caps.
2-4-coccous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Mbomo on the River Lessi).


249 =Acalypha Grantii= _Baker_ & _Hutchinson._

Shrub ab. 6 ft. high, probably diœcious. Leaves alt., ovate, acuminate
to caudate, rounded or subcordate, digitately 5-nerved at base, 2-2½ in.
long, coarsely serrate; pet. ½-1¼ in. long; stip. linear, deciduous.
Male fl. not known. Fem. spikes terminal, ab. ¾ in. long; bracts small,
minutely toothed; sep. 3, ovate, ciliate above; ovary 3-celled, pilose
above; styles 3, purple, deeply laciniate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Sabbi); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=A. paniculata= _Miq._

Monœcious herb, 2-5 ft. high; stems densely pilose above. Leaves ovate,
subcordate or truncate and 5-nerved at base, sparingly bristly on both
sides, coarsely crenate-serrate, 1½-3½ in. long; pet. 1-3½ in. long;
stip. subulate. Male racemes solitary, axillary, 2½-5 in. long; buds
small, 4-lobed; st. 8? Fem. fl. in terminal oblong panicle 6-8 in. long;
branches simple up to 2½ in. long, a few male fl. at the base of each;
sepals 5; ovary slightly 3-lobed with wart-like lumps; styles deeply 4-6
partite.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=A. senensis= _Klotzsch._

Monœcious shrub or undershrub; stems angular or deeply grooved, usually
hirsute. Leaves linear-lanceolate to lanceolate, gradually acuminate,
cordate and 5-nerved at base, serrate, 1¼-7 in. long; pet. ½-1¼ in.
long. Male spikes axillary, ¾-2½ in. long. Fem. spikes terminal, ¾-1¼
in. long; bracts suborbicular, deeply 7-10 toothed; sep. 4; ovary 3-4
lobed; styles 3-4, slightly connate at base, purple, slightly laciniate,
ab. ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-land; Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=A. ornata= _Hochst._

Monœcious undershrub or woody herb; branches somewhat grooved and
hirsute. Leaves ovate, caudate, 5-nerved at base, coarsely serrate,
sparingly pilose on nerves, 2-4½ in. long; pet. ½-2½ in. long; stip.
subulate. Male infl. axillary, solitary, slender, 1½-2 in. long. Fem.
infl. terminal, solitary, 2-3½ in. long; bracts ovate-rhomboid,
acuminate, ¼ in. long, 1-flowered, toothed. Ovary 3-lobed, pilose above;
styles 3, laciniate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Gindua River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-
land: Kulenjo).


=A. villicaulis= _Hochst._

Monœcious herb from a woody root stock; stems angular hirsute. Leaves
linear-lanceolate to ovate, hirsute, acuminate, cordate and 5-7 nerved
at base, crenate-serrate, 1½-4½ in. long; pet. ½-2½ in. long, hirsute,
often with 2 glands at apex. Male infl. axillary, solitary, peduncled,
1½-2½ in. long. Fem. spikes 1-3 together at end of each shoot; bracts
small, toothed, pubescent; sep. coriaceous ovate, pilose on back. Ovary
densely pilose; styles 3, laciniate, ab. ⅓ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: on the banks of the Gendua River); Darfur Prov.
(Kulme 3,600 ft.); Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).


=A. fruticosa= _Forsk._ RIKTUDA—Rashida; MŪT—Hadendowa.

Shrub. Leaves alt., ovate, shortly acuminate, usually abruptly cuneate,
also 3-5 nerved at the base, crenate to serrate, up to 4 in. long and
bearing golden-coloured glands on lower surface. Infl. axillary, up to ½
in. long, consisting of 2-3 unilateral dentate bracts each containing a
solitary fem. fl. and of a very short terminal male spike; ovary with
golden glands; styles 3, much branched.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora); Bahr El Jebel.

The leaves are used in India as a stomachic in dyspepsia and in cholera.


=A. brachystachya= _Hornem._

Slender monœcious annual, 6-12 in. high. Leaves ovate, shortly
acuminate, cordate or rounded and 5-7 nerved at base, serrate, ½-1½ in.
long; pet. ½-1¾. long. Infl. bisexual, short, axillary, solitary or
geminate, of 6-9 fem. fl. below, and male fl. in short, dense terminal
cluster; axis pubescent. Fem. bracts tripartite; sep. 3; ovary bristly;
styles slender, laciniate.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=A. psilostachya= _Hochst._

Herb or undershrub; stems hirsute when young. Leaves ovate or rhomboid,
acutely caudate, rounded or cordate and 5-7 nerved at base, 2-3½ in.
long, serrate, bristly on both surfaces. Infl. bisexual, axillary,
solitary, 1-3 in. long, of 3-4 fem. fl. near the base, otherwise male.
Fem. bracts 5-lobed; sep. 3, ovate; ovary hirsute; styles 3, ¼ in. long,
laciniate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


=A. hochstetteriana= _Muell. Arg._

Monœcious annual, up to 2 ft. high, sparingly hairy. Leaves lanceolate
or elliptic, slightly acuminate, 3-5 nerved at base, ¾-3 in. long,
crenulate, pellucid-dotted. Male spikes solitary in each leaf axil
together but separate from a solitary fem. fl. Male fl., sep. 4. Fem.
fl., bract small, saucer-shaped; sep. 3; ovary warted; styles short,
laciniate.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.


=A. ciliata= _Forsk._

Monœcious herb, ab. 3 ft. high; stem grooved, shortly pubescent. Leaves
ovate, caudate, 5-nerved at base, 1½-4½ in. long, crenate-serrate,
slightly scabrous; pet. 1-3½ in. long. Infl. bisexual, axillary,
solitary or in pairs, ¾-1 in. long, with ab. 10 fem. fl. in the lower
part, upper part male, spicate. Fem. bracts suborbicular, laciniate-
toothed, ribbed; sep. 3, small; ovary slightly pubescent; styles 3,
slender, laciniate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White
Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


=A. glomerata= _Hutchinson._

Erect branched herb; stem sulcate pubescent with short and with gland-
tipped hairs. Leaves ovate- to rhomboid-elliptic, obtuse, 5-nerved at
base, 1-2½ in. long, crenate, rough-pubescent; pet. quite as long as
leaves. Infl. monœcious, crowded in clusters at ends of branches. Fem.
bracts small, sub-reniform, with 8-10 triangular gland-tipped teeth,
crowded; sep. 3, ciliate; ovary 3-lobed, pubescent; styles short,
slender, divided almost to the base.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Addai & Gir).


=A. crenata= _Hochst._

Annual, up to 18 in. high; stem grooved, short-pubescent. Leaves ovate,
5-nerved at base, 1-2 in. long, crenate, glabrous; pet. at least as long
as leaves. Infl. bisexual; fem. fl. crowded at base and a few abortive
ones at tip, male fl. in between, few. Fem. bracts ciliate, not gland-
tipped; ovary pilose, styles 3, laciniate, slender.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Kordofan Prov.


=A. indica= _Linn._

Erect, almost unbranched herb, up to 3 ft. high, shortly pubescent and
angular. Leaves lanceolate- to rhomboid-ovate, acute, cuneate and
5-nerved at base, 1-2½ in. long, serrate, glabrous except on nerves;
pet. usually longer than blade. Infl. bisexual, axillary, solitary, or
in pairs, up to 2½ in. long with 1-7 distant fem. fl. below and few
terminal male fl., with 1 abortive fem. fl. at tip. Fem. bracts 1-2
flowered, suborbicular, up to ⅓ in. broad, with 10-12 triangular teeth;
sep. 3; ovary deeply 3-lobed, pilose; styles short, laciniate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Khartoum Prov.; Upper White Nile
Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).

The roots, leaves and tender shoots are used in India for various
disorders. The juice of the plant is esteemed as an emetic for children.


=A. bipartita= _Muell. Arg._

Climbing shrub, branches angular. Leaves ovate, acuminate, rounded or
subcuneate and digitately 15-nerved at base, 1¼-2½ in. long, serrate,
densely pubescent on nerves below; pet. ½-¾ in. long, pubescent. Infl.
bisexual, axillary, solitary, pedunculate; ped. ab. 1 in. long with a
fem. 2-fl. bract slightly above middle, upper part male, spicate, 1-1½
in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


250 =Lepidoturus laxiflorus= _Benth._

Diœcious shrub or small tree. Leaves oblong, acuminate, rounded and 3-
(rarely 5-) nerved at base, 3-5 in. long, closely crenate, shining and
glabrous above, long hairy on nerves below; pet. 1-1½ in. long. Male
spikes numerous from below the leaves, at length 2-3 in. long; bracts
scarious, ovate; calyx usually 4-lobed; st. 8, filam. slightly connate
at base. Fem. spikes few-flowered; calyx 3-5-sect; ovary 3-celled,
pubescent; styles long, slender, simple; capsule 3-dymous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River & Linduku River &
Kulenjo).


251 =Alchornea cordifolia= _Muell. Arg._

                          _A. cordata_ Benth.

Shrub or small tree, erect or half-climbing. Leaves broadly ovate,
cordate, 4-8 in. long. 3-6 in. broad, subentire, with a gland in the
axil of each nerve at the base. Male spikes in copious axillary
panicles. Styles 2. Fruit puberulous.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=A. glabrata= _Prain._

Shrub or tree, up to 40 ft. high. Leaves alt., almost subsessile, oblong
or oblong-oblanceolate, acute, narrowed to base, entire or crenate, 4-6
in. long, with 1-2 pairs of glands at or near the base below. Infl.
diœcious. Male spikes panicled, terminal; calyx 4-lobed; st. 8 or less,
free or slightly connate at base. Fem. spikes simple, terminal; calyx-
lobes usually 4 (to 6); caps. 3-celled, smooth, ⅓ in. across; styles
simple, linear.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Yuru River).


252 =Neoboutonia macrocalyx= _Pax._

Diœcious tree, up to 65 ft. high. Leaves cordate-orbicular, 5-7 nerved
at base, 8 in. long, hoary-stellate and sparsely lepidote on nerves
beneath; stip. lanceolate, under ½ in. long. Male fl. copiously
panicled, nearly ¼ in. across; calyx 2-fid, stellate pubescent; sta. ab.
30, connective of anther with a terminal gland. Fem. fl. in simple or
sparingly branched racemes, ¾ in. wide; sep. 5, accrescent, connate
below; styles 2-fid, rather broad; caps. 3-coccous, ½ in. across.
Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=N. canescens= _Pax._

Diœcious tree, 25-40 ft. high; twigs rusty-scurfy. Leaves petioled,
orbicular-cordate, acute, entire, 5-7 nerved at base, 4-8 in. long,
sparingly stellate-scurfy on main nerves above, beneath closely
adpressed scurfy. Male fl. copiously panicled; calyx glabrous; sta. ab.
20, filaments hardly longer than anthers; connective usually with 3
apical glands. Fem. fl. in copiously branched racemes, small; ovary with
tufts of stellate hairs; styles narrow with 2 linear lobes. Caps.
3-coccous, brown-scurfy, ¼ in. across.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


253 =Mallotus oppositifolius= _Muell. Arg._

Diœcious shrub, 6-12 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate-acuminate or acute,
cordate or obtuse and 3-nerved at base, 6-7 in. long, somewhat sinuate-
dentate, rusty-stellate on nerves and glandular beneath. Racemes
axillary, rachis rusty-pubescent. Male 4-5 in. long; fl. glomerate;
calyx 4 (-5) valved; sta. numerous, free, purple. Fem. in fl. 2½-3 in.
long; sep. 4-5; ovary 3-celled, globose; stigmas plumose. Caps.
3-coccous, ¼-⅓ in. wide.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River, Dar Fertit: Biri
River near Deim Zubeir, Bongo-land: Baiko); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-
land: Diagbe River).


254 =Macaranga Schweinfurthii= _Pax._

Armed diœcious shrub to lofty tree; spines on stem and branches. Leaves
alt., ovate, shallow lobed, irregularly toothed, 6-18 in. long; base
narrowly deep-cordate and with a pair of glands at junction with
petiole; pet. 8-16 in. long; stip. ovate, 1¼ in. long. Male fl. in
lateral panicles, fascicled in axils of fallen leaves; sta. 2-5. Fem.
fl. in short lateral racemes; ovary glabrous, 2-3 celled; stigmas
spreading; caps. 2-coccous; cocci ½ in. across.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Yuru & Diagbe Rivers).


255 =Ricinus communis= _Linn._ =var. genuina= _Mull. Arg._ HURUA or
KHIRUWI—Arab; BULLAS—Hadendowa; BOMBŌR (Dilling) & PWA (Kadugli)—Nuba;
HOLLOLA or SHUNSHUMUT—Hameg; FAP—Nuer; BUNGA—Zande. The Castor-Oil
Plant.

Tall herb or shrub, with deeply 7 or more lobed palmate leaves. Fl. in
large pyramidal panicles, males below, fem. above. Caps. prickly; seeds
mottled.

Semi-wild on river banks; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile
Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Jebel.

The seeds yield the Castor-Oil of commerce. The leaves, pounded into a
paste, are applied externally for headaches.

=var. africana= _Muell. Arg._

Fruit with only few prickles.

Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (J. Kōn).


256 =Dalechampia scandens= _Linn._ =var. cordofana= _Muell. Arg._
DEMCHIRAI (Meshra El Zeraf) & ABULISEIG (N. Kordn.)—Arab; GADIANG (or
AGADIANG) (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Slender, monœcious climber; stem pubescent; leaves deeply 3-5 partite;
lobes rather wide-oblong, acute or obtuse; base cordate, 5-7 nerved;
length 2-5 in. Fl. in dense, long peduncled axillary heads, subtended by
a pair of yellowish, ½-¾ in. long and broad bracts.

Kassala Prov. (Goz Regeb); Khartoum Prov. (J. Malakhit); White Nile
Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid to Melbes); Upper White Nile
Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Bor, Dinka-land).

It is used for scorpion stings.


257 =Tragia cannabina= _Linn. f._ DEMCHIRAI (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab;
MADIAB-DIAB (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Sub-erect or rambling herb, 2-5 ft. high, sometimes hispid with white,
stinging hairs. Leaves alt., deeply 3-partite, sometimes 5-partite at
base, sometimes without lateral lobes, central lobe oblong, 2½ in. long,
margin lobulate; nerves bristly; pet. ¼-½ in. long. Racemes bisexual,
leaf-opposed, 1-2 in. long on naked, bristly 2-3 in. long peduncles;
male fl. rather lax, numerous, fem. fl. 2-3 below the male; bracts
lanceolate, small. Male sep. 3, ovate; sta. 3. Fem. calyx segm. 6, with
dense white bristles, accrescent later. Ovary bristly; styles 3, connate
in lower half. Caps. 3-coccous.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf);
Sobat River (Nasser); Bahr El Jebel (Shambé and Bari country); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).

=var. Brouniana= _Prain._

Herb, 4-6 in. high, hispid, and with white, stinging hairs. Leaves
short-petioled, deeply 3-partite, narrow-lanceolate, central lobe 2 in.
and lateral ½ in. long; margin sparingly toothed. Racemes terminal,
occasionally leaf-opposed, under 1 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post, Saoleil); Up. White Nile Prov. (Kaka); Nuba
Mts. Prov. (Kadugli).

The root is chewed and applied to scorpion stings.

=var. intermedia= _Prain._

Stems erect or sub-erect, 2-3 ft. high, glabrous or pubescent, beset
with white, stinging hairs. Leaves distinctly petiolate, the lowest
3-partite, the upper sometimes all without lateral lobes, central lobe
lanceolate, 3½ in. long, sparingly sharply toothed. Racemes leaf-
opposed.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile (Dinka country).


=T. tripartita= _Schwfth._

Erect herb, 1½-2 ft. high, woody below; stem with sparse stinging hairs.
Leaves deeply 3-partite, lobes lanceolate or lin.-lanceolate, the
central one 4-7 in. long, margin subentire; pet. up to ⅓ in. long.
Racemes bisexual, terminal and leaf-opposed, 2 in. long on naked
peduncles 1-3 in. long; male fl. above and 1-3 fem. fl. below; bracts
ab. ⅙ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=T. cordifolia= _Vahl._

Slender twiner, without stinging hairs, puberulous. Leaves ovate-
lanceolate, long acuminate, cordate, 2½-4 in. long; margin serrate or
almost fimbriate dentate, puberulous and bristly on nerves; pet. ½-2½
in. long. Racemes bisexual, terminal, rather lax, 1½-2½ in. long, with a
naked peduncle ½-2 in. long. Male fl. numerous above and a solitary
basal fem. fl. Pedicels, both sexes, as long as their bracts and usually
solitary.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. El Amira); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=T. mitis= _Hochst._

Slender twiner without stinging hairs. Differs from above in being
diœcious and in the male fl. being above on the raceme in 3-fl.
glomerules and from middle downwards in lax 3-fl. cymules.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma & near Hammad).


=T. bongolana= _Prain._

Slender climber. Leaves retrosely hispid on nerves and petioles. Male
fl. twice as large as in above, otherwise much alike.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Sabbi & between Kero & Reggo).


=T. Benthami= _Baker._

Slender climber, finely puberulous and with few stinging hairs. Leaves
ovate acute or acuminate, shallowly or rarer deeply wide cordate,
sharply serrate, 2-4 in. long, sparingly bristly on nerves; pet. ¾-2½
in. long, bristly with stinging hairs. Racemes lateral and terminal on
lateral branches, ½-¾ in. long with a naked peduncle, ¼-⅓ in. long,
densely set with stinging hairs; male fl. numerous above and 2-3 basal
fem. fl.; pedicels, both sexes, solitary, almost as long as the bracts.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


=T. Schweinfurthii= _Baker._

Diœcious herb from woody base, 4-8 in. high, densely pilose, without
stinging hairs. Leaves linear-oblong to lanceolate, 1½-2 in. long,
minutely serrate, sessile or nearly so. Racemes terminal and leaf-
opposed, more numerous on male plant. Male racemes 1½-4 in. long with a
short pilose peduncle; pedicels shorter than the lanceolate bracts; sep.
3; sta. 3. Fem. racemes ¾-1½ in. long, with a pilose peduncle ⅓-½ in.
long; fl. 3-6; pedicels longer than bracts; calyx-segm. 6, at length
accrescent; styles 3, short, connate at base; caps. 3-coccous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit & Golo country).


                               =ULMACEÆ.=


258 =Celtis integrifolia= _Lam._ IBNU (Baggara), LEBINGA (Fung Prov.) or
MAHAGAYA (Kordn.)—Arab; EIRĀL (Dilling) & DOMBELABAI (Fan Yan)—Nuba;
BAKKA—Bari.

Large tree with smooth, grey bark. Leaves alt., shortly petioled, ovate,
short acuminate, base unequally rounded, entire, 1½-3 in. long,
3-nerved. Infl. polygamous, axillary, shorter than the leaf, cymose,
hermaphr. fl. above, few, male fl. below, numerous, shorter stalked;
calyx 4-5 lobed; stamens 4-5, minute; stigma bifid, sometimes twice so.
Drupe ovoid, globose, about ⅓ in. long.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Dueim); Kordofan Prov.
(near Singukai); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dar Nuba); Sobat River; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Dinka: Ghazal River, Mittu: Mvolo, Rohl River); Bahr El Jebel.

Wood perishable, yellowish white, density 0.750.


259 =Trema guineensis= _Ficalho._

Shrub or tree; branches hairy. Leaves alt., ovate-oblong, acute to
acuminate, base unequally cordate, 2½-4 in. long, margin denticulate,
basally 3-nerved; petiole short. Infl. axillary, polygamous dense; fl.
5-merous, minute. Drupe small.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).


260 =Chætacme microcarpa= _Rendle._

Shrub or small tree, armed with solitary or paired axillary spines.
Leaves alt., distichous, elliptic-oblong to ovate, apiculate, 2-4 in.
long. Infl. monœcious, male fl. greenish, axillary, cymose; calyx
5-partite; sta. 5; fem. fl. solitary or few; calyx 5-partite; style
2-branched; drupe globose, ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


                               =ROSACEÆ.=


261 =Rubus sp.=

Scandent shrub. Leaves pinnate, with prickly axis; leaflets ovate-
oblong, acutely acuminate, doubly serrate, 2-3 in. long, pubescent on
the nerves beneath. Flowers paniculate; buds ovoid silky, with long
glabrous tips.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River)


262 =Parinarium curatellifolium= _Planch._

Small or moderate-sized tree, tawny-tomentose on extremities. Leaves
alternate, coriaceous, elliptic-oblong, 4½ in. long. Flowers terminal or
from the upper axils, in panicles 3-6 in. long; calyx tube campanulate;
petals 5, inserted in mouth of calyx tube; stamens 7 to many, united
into a tube at base. Drupe size of a plum, edible.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Wau & Biselli).

Hard, heavy wood, light brown in colour, suitable for joinery. Fruit the
size of a plum, edible.


263 =Potentilla supina= _Linn._

Decumbent herb, up to 1 ft. high, with pinnately 3-5 fol. leaves and
leaf-opposed yellow flowers.

Berber, Khartoum, Blue Nile, White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.

The plant is rich in tannin and is probably astringent and tonic. The
root is sometimes used as a febrifuge.


264 =Neurada procumbens= _Linn._

Tomentose annual, with procumbent branches. Leaves ovate-oblong with 1-4
obtuse lobes on each side, ab. ½ in. long. Flowers axillary, solitary,
roundish, hairy. Fruit orbicular, ¾ in. across, prickly.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab, & 21° N.L.)


                            =CHAILLETIACEÆ.=


265 =Dichapetalum Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Large shrub. Leaves obliquely oblong-elliptic, acute, the large about 6
in. by 2½ in., slightly pubescent on the nerves below. Flowers axillary,
clustered white or yellow, sweet smelling. Petals bilobed. Fruit
globose, tomentose.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Mbrwole
River).


                            =CÆSALPINIACEÆ.=


266 =Cæsalpinia pulcherrima= _Sw._

Shrub with bi-pinnate leaves and orange-red flowers, with very long
tassel-like stamens.

Introduced. Cultivated for its brilliant orange-red flower.


267 =Poinciana elata= _Linn._ OGOI—Hadendowa.

Small to middle-sized tree. Leaves abruptly bi-pinnate; flowers large
whitish, turning orange when fading.

Red Sea Prov.

Wood yellow, close, even-grained, easily worked, weight 45-48 lbs. per
cft.


=P. regia= _Bojer._ The Flamboyant or the Gold Mohur Tree.

Large tree, frequently flowers before the leaves appear. Leaves abruptly
bi-pinnate; pinnæ 8-20 pair. Flowers large. Introduced. Highly
ornamental.


268 =Parkinsonia aculeata= _Linn._ SESABAN (wrongly named)—Arab.

Small spiny tree. Leaves bi-pinnate; secondary petioles abruptly
pinnate, somewhat flattened; leaflets small. Flowers yellow; pods
constricted between the seeds. Throughout the Sudan (Introduced).


269 =Cassia Kotschyana= _Oliv._ SENNA & UMKATSHU—Arab; GAFELE &
BOYEH—Golo; OKIL—Jur; RATU—Zande.

Small tree. Leaves abruptly pinnate; flowers in long drooping panicles,
showy, yellow; pods cylindrical, up to 2 ft. long and ab. ½ in. in
diameter, break transversely.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur, Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.


=C. occidentalis= _Linn._ ’SORIB (Baggara) & SENNA—Arab; ASHASHI
(Dilling) & ASHASHINI (J. Ghulfan)—Nuba.

Semi-woody herb, up to 5 ft. high. Leaves abruptly pinnate; rachis 4-6
in. long, with a gland at base; leaflets 4-5 pair, narrow with acute
apex. Flowers yellow; pod linear, slightly compressed between the seeds.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Berber Prov. (Shendi); Khartoum, Blue Nile,
Fung, Kordofan, Darfur & Mongalla Provinces.

The leaves, roots, and seeds are used medicinally, i.e., pounded leaves
for healing fresh wounds, the seeds in ringworm, and the root as
diuretic. An infusion of the leaves is considered useful in bilious
fevers. The seeds toasted, and ground, are used as a substitute for
coffee.


=C. Sieberiana= _DC._

Small tree, glabrous or extremities puberulous. Leaflets 6-14 pair,
ovate-elliptical, up to 3½ in. long. Racemes 4-18 in. long; bracts
present during flowering; flowers yellow; 3 stamens longer than the
other 7. Pod sub-cylindrical, elongate.

Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Mongalla
Prov.

Wood very hard and heavy, fibrous, yellow ochre colour, density 0.818.
Difficult working, suitable for joinery, cart building. Resistant to
pests.


=C. Arereh= _Del._ GARADAYA (Fung)—Arab; KAFA—Burun; UMFLOGORU—Hameg;
GAFELE—Golo; MASISI—Bongo.

Shrub or small tree. Leaflets 7-9 pairs, ovate to lanceolate, obtusely
acuminate, reticulately-veined, 2½ in. long. Racemes terminal short;
bracts present at flowering time; petals yellow; 3 stamens longer than
the rest. Pod cylindrical, up to 20 in. long and 1 in. in diam.,
dehisces longitudinally showing numerous dissepiments.

Nubia; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (South); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Chak Chak); Mongalla Prov.


=C. Tora= _Linn._ HEREISHAH—Arab; KAITELANG (Dilling)—Nuba; KIAR
(Mongalla)—Dinka.

Erect annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 3-pair, obovate, with a gland on
the rachis between the lowest one or two pairs. Flowers yellow, solitary
or in pairs; pod 6-8 in. long, thin, quadrangular, curved when young.

Kassala Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Abu Haraz); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post);
White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur-land: Agade); Mongalla Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme).

Has similar properties to _C. occidentalis_ Linn. (above).


=C. obovata= _Collad._ SANNA or SENNA EL KELB—Arab; AMBARKI—Hadendowa;
ALL’A (Dilling)—Nuba.

Bushy herb. The flat pod has a series of crested plaits on its sides.
Leaflets 3-7 pairs, obovate to oblong. Racemes axillary, bracts
rotundate, ovate; 2 anthers longer than the rest.

Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov., and most parts of the Northern Sudan.

The leaves are occasionally mixed with those of the true Senna.


=C. holosericea= _Fresen._

Shrubby and velvety. Leaflets 5-8 pairs, ovate to oblong, 1 in. long.
Racemes shorter than the leaves. Pod 1½ in. long, broadly falcate.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Seterri, South of Suakin); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).


=C. didymobotrya= _Fres._

Shrub, 10 ft. high. Leaflets 8-16 pairs, oval-oblong, apex rounded,
mucronate, base obliquely rounded. Racemes 5-12 in. long, from upper
axils, flowers packed at first in imbricate, caducous bracts. Pod
linear-oblong, 3-4 in. long.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=C. acutifolia= _Del._ SENNA or SENNA EL RIF (N. Kordn.) & SENNA
MEKKA—Arab.

Undershrub. The flat pod has no crest on its side. Leaflets 4-5 pairs,
oval to lanceolate, acute. Racemes from axils of upper leaves, much
longer than the leaves; pods broadly oblong, slightly curved, without
crest on the sides, ab. 2 in. long.

North Sudan; Red Sea Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile, Darfur & Kordofan
Provinces.

The pods and leaves constitute the true Alexandrian Senna of commerce.


=C. Absus= _Linn._ HABBAT EL AIN (N. Kordn.) & HAB EL AIN (Port
Sudan)—Arab.

Erect annual, 1-2 ft. high, covered with bristly glandular hair. Leaves
small; rachis swollen at the base and with a gland between every one of
the 4 pairs of leaflets, which are broadly oval or obovate-oval; pod 1-2
in., hairy, linear, ab. ¼ in. broad.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.;
Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).

The seeds are used for ophthalmia and the ringworm.


=C. mimosoides= _Linn._

Shrubby. Leaflets very small, linear, unequal sided, usually 10-80 pair;
flowers yellow; pod linear, ab. 2 in. long, slightly pilose.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (El
Obeid & Tekele); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=C. nigricans= _Vahl._ SURIB (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Erect herb, up to 5 ft. high, somewhat similar to above. Leaflets small,
8-18 pair; flowers very small. Pod linear, ab. 2 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov. (Harun); Kordofan
Prov. (near Rahad); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Bongo-land: Addai, Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov.


=C. goratensis= _Fresen._

Shrub or small tree. Leaflets 7-9 pairs, oblong to obovate-elliptic,
rounded both ends, pubescent, 1½ in. long, with inter-petiolular glands.
Flowers corymbose, crowded at ends of branches; petals yellow, large,
unequal. Pods constricted, up to 4 in. long.

Blue Nile Prov. (Upper); White Nile Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Mongalla
Prov. (near Gigging).


270 =Bauhinia fassoglensis= _Kotschy._ KARAUERAU—Arab; PAJ (Bahr El
Ghazal)—Dinka & Jur; USIN—Golo; KORA—Hameg.

Scandent shrub. Leaves bilobed, like a camel’s foot, up to 4½ in. broad.
Flowers in leaf-opposed or terminal racemes, 1 ft. long; calyx strongly
keeled; cor. white; stamens 10, of which usually only 2 perfect.

Kassala & Blue Nile Provinces (Sennar to Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Kordofan
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi).


=B. rufescens= _Lam._ KULKUL—Arab; TARWARA (Dilling)—Nuba.

Small tree, with smooth, white bark. Leaves bilobed, small, usually
under 1 in. diam. Flowers white, small, fragrant, in terminal racemes or
corymbs; calyx spathaceous; stamens 10, perfect. Pod linear, coriaceous,
curved, up to 3½ in. long.

Kordofan, Nuba Mts. & Darfur Provinces.

Wood hard, homogeneous, close and fine grained, density 0.713, light
brown in colour, used in carpentry. The bark is employed for making
ropes, and also for tanning leather. As with other species of this genus
various parts are used in native medicine.


=B. reticulata= _DC._ ABU KHAMEIRA, TAMBAREIB & KHARUB—Arab; KUBUY
(Dilling); KIRKONGAW (J. Eliri), BĀSIGSI (Kadugli) & KADAWDO (Rashad-
Talodi)—Nuba; POFFEH—Bari; PAI (Renk) & PAJ (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka;
PAJ—Jur; KWIELIA or USIN—Golo; MUGGAL—Hameg; DANG & NGWAIN—Nuer;
FOICHA—Burun; DAGPA—Zande.

Small tree; young parts rufous. Leaves large, bilobed. Flowers numerous;
calyx rufous; petals white. Pod long, flat, somewhat twisted, glossy,
dark brown, up to 1 ft. long and 3 in. broad.

South of Lat. 13° N.

Wood rather hard, light brown in colour, density 0.707, homogeneous,
works easily, but is seldom of useful size, it makes poor fuel. Ropes
and clothes are made from the bast fibre by Golo-women. The seeds are
eaten. A decoction of leaves is used as a gargle for toothache. From the
roots a mahogany-coloured pigment is obtained.


=B. variegata= _Linn._ Camel-foot tree.

Moderate-sized tree, with bilobed leaves and axillary racemes of purple
and cream-coloured flowers. Pod 6-18 in. long, linear, flat.

Introduced. Grown in gardens.


271 =Isoberlinia sp.= KOBBO—Bongo.

Leaflets, 4 pairs, ovate, oblique, 5-6 in. long, 3 in. broad,
reticulate. Flowers paniculate. Sepals velvety. Bracts small, deciduous.
Fruits woody. Seeds orbicular, flat.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


272 =Berlinia acuminata= _Solander._ ERIANGA & KOBA—Dinka; KA &
AKKA—Golo; KOBA—Jur; KAWBAW—Bongo.

Large tree with rough, exfoliating bark; occasionally forms pure crops.
Leaves large, abruptly pinnate; leaflets 3-6 pair, 3-9 in. long. Pods up
to 15 in. long and 3 in. broad, flat, olive green, velvety, curling up
spirally after dehiscing. Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.

Wood fibrous, density 0.649, light brownish yellow in colour, works
well, but is readily attacked by insects. Useful for small furniture,
boats, carts, etc.


273 =Pahudia (Afzelia) africana= _Smith._ RIANG—Dinka; PO—Golo; BEI—Jur;
PAWE—Zande.

Very large tree. Leaves paripinnate; leaflets 6-10, glossy, alternate.
Pods up to 9 in. long and 3 in. wide, thick, woody, splitting into two
flat, boat-shaped halves; seeds black, surmounted by orange-coloured
aril at the base.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (near Mongalla).

Timber reddish, resembling Mahogany, strong, somewhat coarse-grained.


274 =Daniellia thurifera= _Bennett._ KELA—Bongo; BELIN & SHANDA—Dinka;
BU or BINDA—Golo; SHANDA—Jur; BOVOTODE—Zande.

Very large tree, with a clean bole, up to 50 ft. before branching; bark
smooth, light grey. Leaves abruptly pinnate. Leaflets 5-9 pairs,
coriaceous, 2-7 in. long. Pods flat, broad-falcate, 1-seeded, the seed
being attached by a long, thread-like process to a membrane, which acts
as a parachute in disseminating the seed.

Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.

Timber light, streaky brown, moderately hard, light, density 0.505,
coarse-grained, works easily, but readily attacked by insect pests;
useful for light furniture, packing cases, knife handles. Good firewood.
The tree yields a Frankincense (the Ogea gum of Sierra Leone) which
exudes from holes made by boring insects or by tapping, and is collected
and sold for body perfume. Bee-hives are made from strips of the bark.


275 =Tamarindus indica= _Linn._ ARDEIB—Arab; SHEKERE (Dilling), KUASHI
(J. Eliri) & DANUFI (Kadugli)—Nuba; BASHA & PATTA & (fruit),
KITTEH—Bari; SHOWI (Renk & Bahr El Ghazal), SHWAI (Mongalla), TCHUWOI
(Goz El Siada) & SHWAYAI (Kaka)—Dinka; SHWAH—Shilluk; KUAR & KWAT—Nuer;
YENNO—Burun; SHOWI—Jur; ARUB or WASSA—Golo; MALAT—Hameg; MAHA—Bongo;
ABANZA—Zande.

Large tree with dark-coloured, fissured bark. Leaves abruptly pinnate,
3-6 in. long; leaflets small, 10-15 pair. Pod pendulous, 3-8 in. long, 1
in. broad, the inner pericarp consisting of a red, acid pulp; seeds
brown, hard.

Southern Sudan; Blue Nile Prov. (Upper); Kordofan Prov.; Red Sea Prov.
(Has Has).

Fruit called TAMR HINDI by Arabs, used for cooling drinks, also
medicinally as laxative. The bark is said to have astringent and tonic
properties. The seed yields an oil which may be used for varnish. The
seed rubbed on a roughstone, with water, is a specific for carbuncular
boils. The wood is hard, fibrous and heavy, density 0.777. It is rather
difficult to work, but is very suitable for cabinet work as the heart-
wood is beautifully mottled black and brown. It is resistant to insect
pests, and is useful for carpentry, ship-building, carts, pestles and
mortars.


276 =Detarium microcarpum= _Guill._ & _Perr._ ABU LEILA—Arab; GUDI (Bahr
El Ghazal)—Dinka; LOYO, LOIGO or MPORO or M’BOLO—Golo; AKUTI—Jur;
MALAGUTU—Bongo.

Small to middle-sized tree. Leaves pari-pinnate; leaflets 6-12,
alternate or opposite, undulate-crenate. Pod disc-shaped, 1½ in. in
diameter, ½ in. thick; the inner pericarp is a sweet pulp, traversed by
fibrous processes from the bony endocarp.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land & Jur-land).

The sweet pulp is eaten as a substitute for sugar. The tree grows to a
large size in Nigeria; its timber is one of these exported under the
name of “African Mahogany.” It is grey in colour, with a fine and
regular grain, density 0.779. It is hard but works well. It is very
resistant to pests and lasts long under water. Very suitable for
carpentry, piles, fences, joinery, etc. It exudes a fragrant resin.


277 =Burkea africana= _Hook. f._

Small tree, 25 ft. high. Leaves bipinnate, up to 3 ft. long, collected
towards ends of branches; pinnæ ab. 3 pairs; leaflets 6-12 per pinna.
Flowers spicate, white, at end of branches. Pod up to 2½ in. long,
oblong or elliptical, flat, coriaceous.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).

Wood clear brown in colour with a fine close grain, density 0.677. It
splits easily and is suited to light carpentry and furniture. Not very
resistant to insect pests.


278 =Erythrophlæum guineense= _Don._ KURU (Wau) & THIEPAGOK
(Rumbek)—Dinka; BANGI or BEI—Golo; KOLU—Jur; IRRIK & GARO—Zande. The Red
Water tree or Sass wood.

Very large tree. Leaves abruptly bipinnate; pinnæ 2-4 pairs; leaflets
6-11 per pinna. Flowers in dense spiciform panicles, small, white or
pale yellow. Pod 3½ in. long and 1¾ in. broad, black, woody.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Khors).

Wood reddish brown, very heavy and hard to work, density 0.821. Close
grained, fibres twisted. Suited to joinery and cabinet making. Very
resistant to pests. The seeds, pods and bark are poisonous. The seeds
are used by Dinkas as a test of a person’s guilt when accused of causing
death by witchcraft or poison. The accused has to swallow some four of
the seeds with water after these have been cut in two. If he dies he is
guilty, but innocent if he is only sick.


                              =MIMOSACEÆ.=


279 =Parkia biglobosa= _Benth._

Tree, 50 ft. high. Leaves 9-18 in. long, bipinnate; pinnæ 14-30 pairs,
with sessile glands at the base of 1 or 2 last pairs; leaflets 1-nerved,
50-70 pairs. Flowers red, in pendulous globose heads. Pods several in a
bunch, 8-12 in. long, depressed between the seeds.

Upper White Nile.

Wood whitish, soft, density 0.699, medium grained, very flexible. Easily
worked and suited to carpentry. The dry pulp of the pods furnishes a
reddish flour containing 60 per cent. of sugar which is eaten with rice
and meat; it is also used in the preparation of a fermented liquor. The
bark and pods are used as a fish poison.


=P. filicoidea= _Welw._ UMRASHAD or MUDUS—Arab; AKON—Dinka; KOFO, LU or
ULU—Golo; NWANA—Jur; RU—Bongo; ABONGBA—Zande.

Large tree with dark outer bark. Leaves abruptly bipinnate; pinnæ 6-9
pairs; leaflets 16-24 pairs, triplinerved. Flowers in dense pendulous,
globose heads, ab. 1½ in. across, scarlet. Pods usually several
together, flat, 8-12 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

Timber white, coarse, not durable. The mealy pulp in which the seeds are
embedded is eaten. The bark is used for tanning.


280 =Entada Wahlbergii= _Harv._

Slender, unarmed climber. Leaves bipinnate; pinnæ 2-4-jugate; leaflets
4-18 pairs, linear-oblong up to 1 in. long. Spikes solitary or panicled;
cor. reddish-brown. Pod flat, arcuate, the chord 4-6 in. long, with up
to 13 articulate divisions, sutures thick, persistent after fall of the
articles.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=E. sudanica= _Schwfth._ SESABAN (Fung), UMKASHO (Baggara) & LAYUK
(Jongol’s Post)—Arab; DEZA—Hameg.

Small tree with bipinnate leaves and large pods, the woody margins of
which persist after the joints containing seeds have fallen out. Pinnæ
5-8-jugate; leaflets 14-20 pairs per pinna.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Bongo-land); Mongalla Prov.


=E. abyssinica= _Steud._

Small tree. Differs from the above by the greater number (14-18 pairs)
of pinnæ and also (25-50 pairs) of leaflets in the pinnæ. Pods hardly
constricted, ab. 6-12 in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


281 =Piptadenia africana= _Hook. f._

Tree. Leaves abruptly bipinnate; pinnæ 9-13 pair; leaflets 30-60 pair,
small, linear; pod 9 in. long and ¾ in. broad, flat, linear; seed ¾ in.
long and ¼ in. broad, narrow oval, furnished with a winged membrane
nearly 3 in. long; flowers in cylindrical spikes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=P. sp.=

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River: Batuka).


282 =Prosopis oblonga= _Benth._ ABU SURUG—Arab; AIRI, GALL & GIER—Bongo;
JIER (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka; IJI, INJI or JI—Golo; KADOL—Jur;
DIGRA—Burun; ZANGARE & INGE—Zande.

Moderate to fairly large tree, with rough bark; pinnæ 2-3-jugate, with a
sessile gland between each pair; leaflets 5-11-jugate. Leaves abruptly
bipinnate. Flowers in spikes, ab. 3 in. long, white. Pod smooth, oval in
cross section. Seeds dark brown.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla); Upper
White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada).

Wood hard, very heavy, density 1.44, regular, strong, fine grained,
takes good polish, dark reddish-brown in colour, is used by Bongos and
Jurs for making charcoal for iron smelting. Good for carpentry,
implements, boat building. Bark used for tanning, also as an antiseptic.
Pods used for poisoning fish.


283 =Amblygonocarpus Schweinfurthii= _Harms._ BINDI & NGUASSA—Dinka;
BINDI—Jur; M’BOSSO & BISHI—Golo; DURA—Krej; GIER—Bongo.

Large tree, 1-3 ft. diam. Leaves bipinnate; leaflets broadly-elliptic, ¾
in. long, ½ in. broad, glabrous. Racemes 4 in. long. Flowers very
numerous, dense, about ¼ in. long, anthers much curved. Fruits
quadrangular.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Golo-land & Dar Fertit).

Wood light, fine grained, easily working, useful for joinery.


284 =Dichrostachys nutans= _Benth._ KADADA—Arab; BARTO (J. Daier), KWĀR
(Dilling) & KĒTIER (J. Eliri)—Nuba; RILEH—Bari; KĪR (White Nile), KI
(Goz El Siada), KĪR & SHĪR (Mongalla)—Dinka; BAKANGO—Golo; ARBIT—Hameg;
KIROH—Shilluk; TILLA or KITCHUN—Burun.

Large armed shrub, the spines being often leaf-bearing. Leaves abruptly
bipinnate; pinnæ 5-10-jugate, with a stipitate gland between each pair;
leaflets 12-22 pairs. Flowers in dense pink and yellow cylindrical
heads; pods much twisted.

Kordofan Prov. & Southern Sudan.

Wood hard, compact, density 0.620, yellow ochre colour, good for cabinet
making.


285 =Neptunia oleracea= _Lour._

Aquatic herb, often floating. Leaves bipinnate; pinnæ 2-3 pair,
opposite; leaflets 8-20 pair. Flowers in an oblong head, ½-1 in. long,
yellow; stamens 10. Pod 1 in. long by ¼ in. wide, long-stalked.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla Prov.

Eaten as a pot-herb.


286 =Mimosa asperata= _Linn._ HAB BITA EL AIN (Baggara), SHAGAR EL FAS &
HABBAS—Arab; MOSAGHANI—Hameg; M’BASE—Golo.

Straggling, prickly shrub. Leaves bipinnate, sensitive; pinnæ 7-16 pair;
leaflets 25-40-jugate. Flower heads globose, pinkish, on ab. 1 in. long
axillary peduncles. Pod very hairy, compressed, linear-oblong, 1 in.
long.

Southern Sudan (Edges of watercourses).

The fruit is used as medicine for the eyes in Kordofan.


287 =Acacia Sieberiana= _DC._

Moderate-sized tree, sometimes large. Stipular thorns straight, usually
short on flowering shoots. Leaves bipinnate, as in other Sudan species;
pinnæ 10-30 pair, with a large gland near base of rachis; leaflets 20-40
pair. Flower-heads globose, on 1-2 in. peduncles, which are solitary
below and fascicled above. Pod 6-7 in. long, 2-valved, straight or
slightly curved, compressed, ¾ in. broad.

Darfur Prov.: Bahr El Jebel (Madi woods).

Wood hard, yellow ochre colour, density 0.946 heartwood, 0.851 sapwood,
readily attacked by insects (white ants, etc.); useful for packing
cases, light furniture, mortars, implements. A decoction of the root
acts as a vermifuge.


=A. spirocarpa= _Hochst._ SAYAL—Arab; TAWĀR or TOWAI—Hadendowa; KANDIA
(J. Daier)—Nuba; MUTU—Bari.

Large tree with bipinnate leaves and straight stipular spines. Flower-
heads globose, greenish-white; pods spirally twisted. Pinnæ 4-10 pairs;
leaflets 7-15 pair, very small.

Northern Sudan; Blue Nile, White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.

The bast yields a strong fibre. The pods are called ULLAF—Arab.


=A. tortilis= _Hayne._ SAMR—Arab; SANGANEIP & SANGANĒ—Hadendowa;
SAKBE—Rashida.

Obconical, flat-topped, large shrub or small tree, with straight and
curved spines. Flower-heads globose, whitish; pods twisted. Pinnæ 2-5
pairs, glands on rachis minute or absent, leaflets 8-12 pairs, linear-
oblong.

North Sudan.

Sapwood moderately dark or brown, heartwood small, dark brown. Medullary
rays fine. Pores uniform, moderate sized, in concentric lines of flat
arcs. Wood fairly hard and heavy, used in the Red Sea Prov. for ribs of
boats and for pulleys and blocks. It is liable to attacks of boring
insects.


=A. nilotica= _DC._

Characters as in the next species, but pods quite glabrous.

Red Sea Prov. (near Suakin); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Berber Prov.;
White Nile Prov. (Wad Shellai).


=A. arabica= _Willd._ SANT, SNUT or SUNT—Arab; ALLWI (Goz El
Siada)—Dinka; LENG—Burun; GARAD (Tagele)—Nuba.

Large tree with straight spines, up to 2 in. long. Flower-heads globose,
yellow. Pods white, tomentose, much contracted between the seeds. Pinnæ
usually 3-12 pairs with or without gland between lowest and, at times, 1
or 2 upper pairs; leaflets 10-30 pairs, linear-oblong.

North Sudan; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile (from 10° N.L.
Northwards, rare South of Jebelein); Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile
Prov. (Goz El Siada).

=var. A. Adansonii= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Differs from above in the pods, which are not or hardly contracted
between the seeds.

Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid).

The young bark yields a fibre. Timber hard, heavy, density 0.945
heartwood and 0.827 sapwood, durable, short fibred and somewhat brittle,
resistant to water and white ants, used for construction work and boat
building, building, etc. The pods, called GARAD by Arabs, as well as the
bark, used for tanning, a decoction is administered in dysentery. The
pods are also used as a dye. The gum, although inferior to that of _A.
Verek_, is an article of commerce; that from India is known as “Ghatti
gum.”


=A. verugera= _Schwfth._ KŪK—Arab; ABELAINY (Dilling), KWEILE (J. Eliri)
& KUSSI (Kadugli)—Nuba; SHEBIL—Hameg; PUKULI—Bari; KOG (Kaka), TEP
(Mongalla), TIP (Renk) & TIPAGOK (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka; TIAP—Shilluk;
TEF—Nuer; DAGLIE—Zande.

Very large tree with grey-white bark and with straight, white spines, 1½
in. long. Pinnæ 7-14 pair, leaflets 20-30 pairs. Flowers globose, white,
about ¾ in. across. Pod up to 6 in. long, slightly curved, flat, thick,
¾ in. wide, green.

Kassala Prov. (near Kassala); South of Lat. 13° N.

Wood white, not durable. The qualities of the gum have yet to be
investigated.


=A. nubica= _Benth._ EL UT or AUD & LAOT—Arab; GAMEROT—Rashida; ANJERA
(J. Daier), MAIN (Dilling), UNGUS (Tagele) & MA (J. Ghulfan)—Nuba; ANAN
(Renk) & KONYAI (Kaka)—Dinka; AFIAD—Shilluk.

Obconical shrub with spines ab. ½ in. long, somewhat recurved. Pinnæ
3-12 pairs with or without 2-3 minute sessile glands; leaflets 6-15
pairs, small, oblong. Pod linear-oblong, narrowed at each end, almost
narrowly-winged, yellowish, 2-3 in. long. Flowers in globose heads on
1-3 axillary peduncles.

Kassala, Red Sea, Blue Nile, White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.

The bark is used for tanning. The bast yields a good fibre.


=A. etbaica= _Schwfth._ ARRAD or GARRAD—Hadendowa and Rashida.

Small tree; extremities at first red-brown; stipular thorns straight,
short. Pinnæ 3-6 pairs, without glands; leaflets 14-30 pairs. Peduncles
3-5 in each axil, bearing rather few-flowered globose heads. Pods
linear, compressed, almost straight, brown, glabrous up to 3½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov.

The bark is used for tanning.


=A. Seyal= _Del._ TELEH (Baggara), TALH HAMRA or TALHA—Arab; ME (J.
Daier), SHALEIH (Dilling), TEILI (J. Eliri) & TIRIGO (Kadugli)—Nuba;
KUKATI—Bari; BI (Kaka), RATT (Renk) & TEP (Mongalla)—Dinka; MELA—Hameg;
TEIB & LUOR—Nuer; ALLAD—Shilluk.

Small to middle-sized tree, with rufous bark; spines white, straight or
nearly so, up to 1½ in. long. Pinnæ 11-12 pairs; leaflets 18-22 pairs.
Flowers globose, yellow, about 1 in. diam. Pods ab. 3 in. long, curved,
slightly contracted between the seeds.

Throughout the Sudan.

Wood white, not durable, liable to attacks of insects, especially if cut
green. The gum is of good quality but inferior to that of _A. Verek_.
The bark is used for tanning and the bast yields a fibre. Native women
fumigate themselves with the wood smoke.


=A. Seyal= _Del._ =var. Fistula= _Schwfth._ TALH BEID & SOFFAR—Arab;
SHALEIH WIWI (Dilling)—Nuba; BAGU—Hameg; KONAIYER (Kaka) & TEP
(Mongalla)—Dinka; ASHAR—Shilluk.

South Sudan.

Much like preceding but bark white and the bases of the thorns inflated.

Moister parts of the Sudan.

Has the same qualities as Red Talh.


=A. Ehrenbergiana= _Hayne._ SALLAM—Arab.

Shrub with brown papery bark. Flower-heads globose, golden yellow.
Spines slender, straight, also hooked. Pinnæ 1-2 pairs; leaflets 8-10
pairs, oblong. Pod narrow-linear, falcate, constricted between the
seeds, up to 4½ in. long.

Northern Sudan, usually in arid tracts.

Yield a gum.


=A. stenocarpa= _Hochst._

Small tree; spines straight, short. Flowers globose, yellow; pods curved
as in _A. Seyal_. Pinnæ 4-10 pairs with at least 1 gland, sessile at
base of the rachis; leaflets 10-20 pairs, linear oblong.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Nyangara);
Mongalla Prov.

One of the species affording the Gum-arabic of commerce.


=A. Verek= _Guill._ & _Perr._ HASHAB & SUBAHI (Wad Medani)—Arab;
KALIALMO (J. Daier) & TŪT (Dilling)—Nuba; KADOFI—Bari; ATĪYDOK (Kaka) &
CHIANDOK (or CHIANDAK) (Mongalla)—Dinka; GARANDAK—MESHIRG—EDIN—Hameg;
ADHWAG—Shilluk; BAM—Nuer.

Small to moderate-sized tree; spines 3, stout, sharp, dark brown, short,
two straight and one recurved. Pinnæ 3-5 pairs; leaflets 10-15 pairs.
Flowers in lax cylindrical spikes, white. Pods thin, straight, papery, 3
in. long.

Southern Nubia; From Berber Province to Mongalla; Fung, Darfur &
Kordofan Provinces.

Wood dark, durable. This tree yields the best gum of commerce.


=A. glaucophylla= _Steud._ HASHAB (Kassala & Karora)—Arab.

Large shrub or small tree, glabrous, or extremities puberulous; infra-
stipular prickles 2-3, short, straight or slightly recurved, often
absent. Pinnæ 3-6-jugate, with small gland at base of rachis; leaflets
12-20 pairs, oblong. Spikes 1-3 in axils; flowers white. Pod linear,
flat, narrowed each end, 3-4 in. long.

Between Suakin & Berber (Omareg); Kassala Prov. (J. Kassala); Red Sea
Prov. (Karora hills).


=A. mellifera= _Benth._ KITTIR—Arab; KAWTAW (J. Daier) & URŪM
(Kadugli)—Nuba; NARAH (Renk)—Dinka.

Small tree or shrub; infra-stipular prickles 2, short, recurved. Pinnæ
2-jugate; leaflets 1 pair per pinna, obovate-oblong or -rotundate.
Spikes axillary, fascicled, white. Pod 2 in. long, flat, oblong.

Red Sea Prov. (between Sinkat & Erkowit & Katai Geraite); Around Kassala
& Gedaref routes; From Khartoum to Upper Nile Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.
(Wad Medani to Sennar); Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.

This tree, which grows gregariously, forms often most impenetrable
thorny thickets. The fibre from the liber is largely used in making
sacks to hold gum.


=A. læta= _R. Br._

Small tree; prickles short, black, shining. Pinnæ 2-3 pairs; leaflets
3-5 pairs, oblanceolate, oblong. Spikes axillary, solitary or fascicled.
Pod 2-3 in. long, flat, oblong, often once or twice constricted,
coriaceous.

Red Sea Prov. (J. Waratab, near Suakin); Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.
(Nyemati); Kordofan Prov.


=A. albida= _Del._ HARAZ—Arab; SIRTU (J. Daier), NAGAN (Tagele), URĀD
(Dilling & J. Ghulfan) & FORWEK (Kadugli)—Nuba.

The largest of Sudan Acacias; branches whitish; spines short, straight.
Flowers white, in spikes, which are axillary, solitary or in pairs.
Pinnæ 4-6 pairs, with a gland between each pair; leaflets 7-17 pairs,
oblong. Pod 2-5 in. long, flat, curved, often sinuous.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); From Dongola to Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Blue
Nile, Kordofan, Darfur & Mongalla Provinces.

Wood white, liable to attacks of insects, used for boat-building. Pod
fleshy, somewhat twisted, called KHARUMA by Arabs, good cattle fodder.


=A. Suma= _Kurz._ KAKAMŪT & SINEIN—Arab; PANKAJA (Dilling)—Nuba; FIIT
(Renk) & PAIT (Kaka)—Dinka; ODU—Hameg; NIARUD—Shilluk; NGWER—Nuer;
VURRA—Zande.

Small to moderate-sized tree with dark, fissured bark. Prickles broad-
based, sharply recurved. Pinnæ 10-30 pairs, with a gland at the base of
each pair and another below the first pair; leaflets 30-50 pairs.
Flowers in pale-yellow spikes. Pods 3-4 in. long, crustaceous, brown
when ripe.

Fung, White Nile & Kordofan Provinces; Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat
River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov.

Usually in more or less wet ground. Timber dark coloured, strong, used
in making ploughs. The wood probably yields a Catechu.


=A. hecatophylla= _Steud._

Tree, branches hoary-tomentose; prickles short, recurved. Pinnæ 10-30
pairs; leaflets 30-50 pairs, larger than in _A. Suma_, Kurz, oblong,
obtuse. Flowering spikes white, solitary or fascicled. Pod oblong,
obtuse, coriaceous, 7 in. long.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=A. ataxacantha= _DC._

Small tree or shrub, with short, decurved, scattered prickles. Leaf-
rachis with a raised gland near the base; pinnæ 7-15 pairs; leaflets
20-40 pairs, linear-subfalcate. Flower spikes dense, white, solitary or
in pairs, axillary. Pod broad-linear, flat, papery.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=A. macrostachya= _Reichenb._

Tree, green parts rusty-tomentose; prickles short, recurved, scattered.
Leaf-rachis with a sessile gland near the base; pinnæ 14-30 pairs;
leaflets 25-50 pairs, linear, subfalcate. Spikes 3-4 in. long, axillary,
fascicled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=A. pennata= _Willd._

Scandent shrub; prickles sharp, recurved, scattered over branchlets,
under petioles and on inflorescence. Pinnæ 8-20 pairs; leaflets up to 70
pairs. Flower-heads globular, white or pale yellow. Pod reddish-brown,
thin, ab. 4 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé & Bongo-land).


=A. near reficiens= _Wawra_ & _Peyr._ SALGAM (Kordn.)—Arab; IMGYEN
(Dilling)—Nuba.

Tree, in habit not unlike _A. spirocarpa_; twigs nodose; spines
straight, up to 1½ in. long. Flowers not seen; pods curved, somewhat
turgid. Bark dark and rough; heartwood dark brown. Leaflets about 15
pairs, oblong, ⅙ in. long, ciliate.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (from Sungikai South).

Heartwood very dark brown. Exudes a gum.


=A. near gummifera= _Willd._ MIT—Bari.

Tall tree, with habit and bark of _A. arabica_; timber light red,
without heartwood. Flowers not seen; pods curved, somewhat turgid.

Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Tombé).


=A. near papyracea= _Hochst._

Prickles ⅙ in. long, hairy at the base. Leaflets about 15 pairs, oblong,
⅙ in. long, veinless, glabrous. Flowers in heads about ⅓ in. diam.
Fruits not seen.

Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon).


=A. sp. near albida= _Del._

Small tree, 15-20 ft. high. Leaflets about 25 pairs, linear-oblong,
rounded at the apex, glaucous, ⅓ in. long, the lowermost pair very
small. Flowers in spikes, white; pod not seen.

Mongalla Prov. (Lado).


=A. Farnesiana= _Willd._

Shrub; spines straight, stipular. Pinnæ 4-8 pairs; leaflets 12-20 pairs.
Flower-heads globose, deep yellow, sweet-scented; pod 2-3 in. long,
turgid.

Introduced.


288 =Albizzia amara= _Boivin._ ARRADA—Arab; SUK (J. Daier), ORBOL
(Dilling) & MINKIGILI (Kadugli)—Nuba; MĪLLOA (Goz El Siada)—Dinka;
BIMYA—Burun.

Unarmed moderate-sized to large tree. Leaves bipinnate; pinnæ 10-20
pairs; leaflets 25-35 pairs, linear. Flower-heads dense, ab. 1 in. in
diameter, yellow or pinkish. Pod linear-oblong, 4-8 in. long, edges
undulate.

Blue Nile Prov. (Sheikh Talha); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Meshra El Rek & Tonj); Darfur
Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada).

Timber strong; yields a gum.


=A. anthelmintica= _A. Brongn._ TĀKIRNI, UMTAKIRNI, UMGIRSH & GERFET EL
DŪD (All Kordofan)—Arab; EIBELAINY (Dilling)—Nuba; AGWAR—Shilluk.

Moderate-sized tree, with smooth, grey bark, unarmed. Leaves bipinnate
with 1 or more sessile glands on the rachis. Pinnæ 1-4 pairs; leaflets
2-5 pairs, the upper larger, sometimes up to 1¾ in. long, obliquely
obovate, mucronate. Flower-heads fascicled or solitary in upper axils,
whitish. Pod 2-6 in. long, sinuous, crustaceous.

White Nile Prov.; Kordofan & Nuba Mts. Prov. (from Habbania southwards);
Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf W.S.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar
Fertit: Deim Guju).

Heartwood red, very hard, durable, works well. The bark (?) is used by
Abyssinians against Tape-worm.


=A. ferruginea= _Benth._ ?SIAP—Dinka; BEKILI & BIRI—Golo; M’BALIM—Bongo;
N’ZANGARNE—Zande.

Medium-sized tree with rusty pubescence. Pinnæ 3-6 pairs; leaflets 8-16
pairs, oblong, obtuse, ab. ½ in. long. Flower-heads capitate, more or
less silky. Pod straight, linear, 4-6 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=A. Lebbek= _Benth._ LABAKH, LEBBEK—Arab.

Large tree with dark-grey bark. Pinnæ 2-4 pairs; leaflets 5-9 pairs,
rather large, unequal sided. Flowers white in few flowered heads. Pod up
to 12 in. long, up to 2 in. wide, linear-oblong, thin, pale yellow.

Introduced as a shade-tree.

Wood handsome, brown, fine grained, takes a good polish, is known in the
trade as “Indian Walnut.” Does not last long in exposed situations. The
bark is used for tanning and the seeds are astringent. The tree yields a
gum not unlike Gum-arabic.


=A. Aylmeri= _Hutch._ SEREIRA, GARADAYA—Arab.

Large tree, 75 ft. high, 8 ft. in girth. Leaflets oblong-elliptic,
rounded on one side, cuneate on the other at the base, 1-1½ in. long,
½-1 in. broad, glaucous green and puberulous below, with about 8 pairs
of looped lateral nerves. Peduncle 1½ in. long, thinly pubescent. Calyx-
lobes villous. Fruit 8 in. long, 1¼ in. broad, glabrous, obscurely
transversely nervose.

Fung Prov. (River Dinder).


=A. Brownei= _Walp._ ?ĀKATAGAN—Jur.

Moderate-sized tree. Leaf-rachis with 1 sessile gland at base and
another between uppermost pinnæ; pinnæ 2-3 pairs; leaflets 3-5 pairs,
rhomboid to ovate, up to 3 in. long. Flower-heads forming broad
corymbose racemes, 3-4 in. long. Pod linear-oblong, 4-6 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Bongo-lands, Dar Fertit); Mongalla Prov.
(Yambi Khor).

Wood is durable and suitable for building purposes.


=A. Welwitschii= _Oliv._

Large tree, up to 80 ft. high; extremities glabrous or tawny-puberulous.
Leaf-rachis 3-10 in. long, with 1 gland near the base and 1 or more
above; pinnæ 3-5 pairs; leaflets 4-8 pairs obliquely ovate to rhomboid,
up to 2 in. long. Flower-heads forming short terminal corymbs or 1-2
together, axillary. Pod straight or slightly curved, 4-5 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=A. sp.= MANDOMI—Bari.

Tree, 30-40 ft. Leaflets 4 pairs, very obliquely oblong, about 1½ in.
long, ¾ in. broad, glabrous, except the puberulous midrib. Fruits 5½ in.
long, 1 in. broad, reticulate.

Mongalla Prov. (Sillitoe No. 191).


=A. sp.= BENDE—Golo or Dinka.

Fruits flat, 5 in. long, 1 in. broad, glabrous. Seeds broadly elliptic,
flat, ½ in. long, with a large wrinkled aril.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (by the Pongo River, 8° N.L.)


                            =PAPILIONACEÆ.=


289 =Lotononis Leobordea= _Benth._

Small procumbent herb, silky pubescent. Flowers 2-5, sessile, in axils
of 3-fol. leaves; calyx with 4 upper teeth more or less connate; corolla
yellow; stamens 10, monadelphous, the tube slit along the top. Pod
length of calyx, linear-oblong, turgid.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab).


290 =Rothia hirsuta= _Baker._

Small annual; corolla white to pale violet; stamens 10, monadelphous;
tubes slit along the top; calyx deeply 5-cleft. Pod lanceolate,
inflated. Leaves 3-fol.

Khartoum & Kordofan Provinces.


291 =Crotalaria thebaica= _DC._ TAKTAKA (Atbara), UMANKEIT or NUTTASH
(N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Shrubby herb; flowers pale yellow; stamens 10, monadelphous, in a tube
slit along the top; style abruptly bent upwards in this genus; pod ¼ in.
long. Leaves simple, sessile, oblong, silky.

North Sudan; Between Goz Regeb & Kassala; Berber Prov. (Atbara);
Kordofan Prov. (North & West); Darfur Prov. (60 m. N.E. of El Fasher).

Used as one of the ingredients to cure gonorrhœa.


=C. Vogelii= _Benth._

Erect, hairy herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves simple, linear to linear-
lanceolate. Flowers in lax racemes, yellow, veined purple. Pod ⅜ in.
long, linear-oblong.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=C. calycina= _Schrank._

Erect herb, 1-2 ft. high, or more, very hairy; leaves variable, nearly
sessile, simple. Flowers large, hairy, yellow, 4-8 in terminal racemes,
peduncles stout, deflexed in fruit, bracts in pairs, beneath each
flower; calyx large, equalling petals; pod rather short, glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=C. sphærocarpa= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Annual with 3-fol. leaves; leaflets sessile, linear-oblong. Flowers in
long-stalked, lax racemes; cor. yellow. Pod roundish-oblong, ⅙ in. long.

Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land & Niamniam-land).

=var. angustifolia= _Hochst._

Leaflets linear-oblong, sessile, glabrous above, appressed-pubescent
below. Racemes many-flowered, 3-6 in. long. Pods sessile, obovoid, ¼ in.
long, pubescent, often 2-seeded.

Kordofan & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.

=var. grandiflora= _Schwfth._

Leaflets linear-oblanceolate. Flowers larger: keel ¼-⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=C. atrorubens= _Hochst._

Herb 18 in. to 3 ft. high; corolla yellow, tinged with red; pod sessile,
⅜ in. long, silky. Leaves nearly sessile; leaflets 3, subsessile,
terminal, one oblanceolate, silky beneath.

Kordofan Prov., Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=C. ononoides= _Benth._

Herb. Leaves trifoliate, leaflets oblong-elliptic or lanceolate, acute,
1-2 in. long, pubescent below. Pod sessile, glabrous, ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai).


=C. lupinioides= _Hochst._

Shrubby plant. Fl. yellow in elongate racemes; pod much curved upwards,
filled with silky hairs. Leaflets 3, subsessile.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Berber Prov.


=C. spinosa= _Hochst._

Shrubby, spiny annual, 6-18 in. high. Leaflets 3, emarginate. Flowers
yellow, solitary or in pairs from the axils of spines.

Widely distributed in White Nile & Bahr El Jebel; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land: Nganye).


=C. laburnifolia= _Linn._

Semi-shrubby herb. Leaves 3-fol.; keel of corolla very long-beaked; pod
long-stalked, inflated.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=C. near laburnifolia= _Linn._

Shrub plant, under cultivation reaching 8-10 ft. in height. Corolla
yellow, not streaked with purple; keel much recurved.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dilling).


=C. polysperma= _Kotschy._

Rufous, villous herb. Leaflets 3, short-stalked, obovate-oblong. Flowers
6-8, in lax, lateral, long-peduncled racemes.

White Nile Prov.


=C. polysperma= _Kotschy._ =subspecies C. Grantii= _Baker._ TAKTAKA
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; DIAGNE (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Villous herb; corolla blue in bud. Pod subsessile, turgid, with fine
brown hairs; seeds 30-40.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf & southwards).


=C. intermedia= _Kotschy._

Annual, 2-3 ft. high. Corolla usually yellow, but in specimens from the
Bahr El Jebel it is much streaked with purple and sometimes quite
purple.

Upper Nile Prov. (Tonga: Ragaba); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land);
Mongalla Prov. (Gemeiza & Mongalla); Darfur Prov. (Zalingei); Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post).

The Bongos make strong string from its fibre.


=C. brevidens= _Benth._

Erect herb. Leaflets 3, subsessile, glabrous, linear. Flowers in few-
flowered terminal racemes. Pod cylindrical, glabrous, 1½ in. long.

Nubia.


=C. cannabina= _Schwfth._ URU—Golo; KHOLO—Bongo; AWIRKI—Zande.

Tall, shrubby herb, erect, stems sulcate, winged. Leaves 3-foliolate;
leaflets oblong or oblong-elliptic, 2-4½ in. long. Flowers large,
numerous, in racemes. Pods oblong-cylindric, 1½-2 in. long, becoming
glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Niamniam & Bongo lands).

The fibre is used for ropes and in Bongo-land the plant is cultivated.


=C. maxillaris= _Klotzsch._ ABKILEH (Atbara) SAFEIRA, SABARIG & TAWILA
(Abu Haraz, Blue Nile)—Arab.

Shrubby herb, 2-3 ft. high, downy. Leaflets 3, subsessile, oblong.
Racemes terminal, many-flowered; corolla yellow. Pod oblong, very silky,
⅜ in. long.

Berber Prov. (near El Damer); Blue Nile Prov. (Abu Haraz); White Nile
Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Tueir & El Greo); Darfur Prov.


=C. Forbesii= _Baker._

Undershrub, 12-18 in. high, densely grey-downy. Flowers yellowish,
axillary, solitary or in pairs. Pod silky, under ½ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Abu Naama).


=C. Dilloniana= _Baker._

Herb; leaflets 3, glabrous, central one 3½ in. long and 1 in. broad. Pod
¾ in. long, linear, deflexed on elongated terminal racemes.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. Quartiniana= _A. Rich._

Silky herb, 1 ft. high. Leaflets 3, central one 1½ in. long. Racemes
lateral, 3-4 flowered; corolla reddish. Pod 1 in. long and ½ in. thick,
glabrous.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s post); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf);
Darfur Prov. (Zalingei); Kordofan (Obeid).


=C. microphylla= _Vahl._

Tufted herb, up to 1 ft. high. Leaflets 3, very small, sessile. Flowers
axillary, solitary or in pairs, yellow. Pod oblong, glabrous, under ½
in. long.

Red Sea Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Geteina).


=C. microcarpa= _Hochst._

Herb, 6-12 in. high, thinly brown-silky. Leaflets 3, central one ½ in.
long, linear-oblong. Flowers yellow, in clusters of 2-4. Pod ¼ in. long,
silky.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).

=var. Dawei= _Baker fil._

Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.

Rather woody; cor. tinged with red. Leaves rather broader than in type.

Mongalla Prov. (Bari-land).

=var. Sudanica= _Baker fil._

Slender annual. Leaves narrow, ashy grey; racemes lax, 2-3 flowered. Pod
sessile, sub-globose.

Nuba Mts. Prov.


=C. podocarpa= _DC._

Herb 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 3, sessile, oblanceolate. Flowers axillary,
2-3 together, yellow. Pod up to 1 in. long and ½ in. thick.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=C. goreensis= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Shrubby herb, 1-3 ft. high. Stipules ¼ to ½ in. long, lanceolate-
falcate. Flowers 10-20 in dense heads, yellow tinged with red. Pod
oblong ¾ in. long.

Nubia; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé).


=C. Deflersii= _Schwfth._ (= =C. senegalensis= _Bacle_). FARTAGA (Bl.
Nile)—Arab.

Bushy herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves 3-fol.; leaflets sessile, oblong to
oblanceolate. Racemes terminal, 20-30 flowered; corolla bright yellow.
Pod about ½ in. long, 10-12 seeded.

Red Sea Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Upper); White Nile Prov. (Hillet Abbas);
Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad).


=C. elata= _Welw._

Erect undershrub, 2-3 ft. high. Leaflets 3, oblong-lanceolate, adpressed
brown silky below. Flowers yellow, 1 in. long, 3-6 together on short
leaf-opposed peduncles. Pod oblong, subsessile 1½ in. long, with dense
brown silky hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. pycnostachya= _Benth._

Herb, about 18 in. high. Leaflets 3, central one 1 in. long. Flowers
20-50 in dense lateral racemes 2-3 in. long. Pod cylindrical, ⅜ in.
long, downy.

Fung Prov. (near Roseires).


=C. astragalina= _Hochst._

Herb, about 1 ft. high. Leaflets 3, central one 1½ in. long. Flowers
6-12 in dense lateral racemes, yellow, streaked with purple. Pod
cylindrical, ½ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: by the Gendua River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).


=C. bongensis= _Baker fil._

Annual with slender branches. Leaves simple, linear-lanceolate, 3-5 cm.
long, 0.5 cm. broad, pilose beneath. Racemes axillary. Flowers small.
Pod subsessile, oblong, 7-8 cm. long, at first densely pubescent,
8-seeded.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, Jur-land: Jur Ghattas).


=C. retusa= _Linn._ URU—Golo.

Woody herb. Leaves simple, oblanceolate, sessile, 2 in. long. Racemes
4-6 in. long, terminal. Corolla yellow. Pod linear, 1½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

The fibre is used for ropes and nets.


=C. falcata= _Vahl._

Shrubby, 2-3 ft. high. Leaflets 3, obovate, central one 1½ in. long.
Racemes lax, terminal and axillary; cor. yellow, keel much upcurved. Pod
1½ in. long, cylindrical.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River, Nasser).


=C. striata= _DC._ BIRBUS—Arab; URU—Golo.

Erect woody herb, up to 6 ft. high. Pod glabrous, 20-30 seeded, ½ in.
long. Cor. bright yellow. Leaflets 3.

Nubia; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).

The fibre is used in the Bahr El Ghazal for making nets for catching big
game.


=C. zanzibarica= _Benth._

Small undershrub. Flowers yellow; legumes oblong. Racemes terminal of
10-20 flowers.

Upper White Nile Prov. (between Abwong & Nasser).


=C. platycalyx= _Steud._

Bushy herb; cor. white or yellow; keel long-beaked, much upcurved.
Racemes lateral, few-flowered. Pod long-stalked, cylindrical, ab. 1½ in.
long. Leaflets 3, central one 2½ in. long.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf to Malakal).


292 =Lupinus Termis= _Forsk._ TIRMIS—Arab.

Silky herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves digitate, 5-7 fol. Racemes of 4-12
flowers. Cor. blue and white. Pod 3 in. long and ab. ½ in. thick.

Sudan North.

Cultivated for the seed which is highly nutritious and credited with
mild medicinal properties.


293 =Argyrolobium abyssinicum= _Jaub._ & _Spach._

Herb, 6-18 in. high. Leaves 3-fol.; leaflets linear or oblanceolate.
Racemes axillary, 2-3 flowered; calyx bilabiate, the two upper teeth
free; cor. pale yellow. Pod linear, grey silky, ab. 1 in. long.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (21°-22° N.L.); Blue Nile Prov. (Upper).


=A. Schimperianum= _Hochst._

Small shrub. Leaves 3-fol.; leaflets obovate, blunt, not more than 1 in.
long. Flowers 3-8 in terminal heads, yellow. Pod linear brown-silky.

Kordofan Prov.


294 =Trigonella Fœnum-græcum= _Linn._ HELBA—Arab.

Annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 3, obovate-cuneate. Flowers yellow,
solitary or in pairs, axillary. Pod linear-falcate, 2-4 in. long.

Northern Sudan. (Cultivated as a vegetable.)

The seeds yield a yellow dye; the yellow decoction gives a fine
permanent green with Sulphate of Copper. Medicinally the seeds are used
to cure dyspepsia, diarrhœa and dysentery.


=T. hamosa= _Linn._

Annual. Leaflets 3, obovate-cuneate, the upper margin inciso-crenate.
Flowers yellow, 6-12 in axillary racemes. Pod linear-falcate.

Dongola Prov. (Opposite Letti); Berber Prov. (Shendi); Khartoum; White
Nile; Kordofan Prov. (Habaga).


=T. occulta= _Del._

Annual; leaflets toothed near apex; stipules deeply laciniate from the
apex. Flowers yellow, in axillary clusters of 2-4. Pod elliptical,
reticulated.

Khartoum, Fung & Kordofan Provinces.

The seeds are sometimes used for dysentery; the plants and pods are
eaten as a pot-herb.


=T. laciniata= _Linn._

Diffuse glabrous annual. Stipules laciniate; leaflets 3, deeply
serrated. Racemes of 6-12 axillary, yellow flowers. Pod linear oblong,
transversely veined.

Dongola Prov.


295 =Medicago sativa= _Linn._ BERSĪM HEGAZI—Arab. Lucerne.

Herb; pod spirally contorted, so as to form 2 or 3 flat spires. Leaflets
3, linear-oblanceolate, serrate on upper margin; stipules narrow.
Flowers violet or blue, in axillary racemes.

Introduced.

The Arabian variety is mostly cultivated in the Sudan. Under irrigation
it is an excellent fodder crop.


296 =Trifolium fragiferum= _Linn._

Herb; heads globular; flowers small; calyx inflated after flowering.
Leaflets 3, obovate, toothed.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=T. procumbens= _Linn._

Slender, glabrous or slightly downy annual; flower-heads loosely
globular. Leaflets obovate or obcordate, toothed.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=T. alexandrinum= _Linn._ BERSĪM BALADI—Arab.

Glabrous herb, 1-2 ft. high. Flowers 20-30 in. in dense oblong, long-
stalked heads, yellow. Pod minute. Leaflets sessile, obovate-cuneate,
toothed.

Northern Sudan (cultivated).


297 =Lotus nubicus= _Hochst._

Procumbent herb, 3-6 in. high; leaves pinnate; leaflets 3-5, the lowest
pair close to the axil. Flowers reddish-yellow, 1-4 together with a
leaflet-like bract at the base of the cluster. Pod linear-oblong, small.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab, etc.); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol, etc.).


=L. arabicus= _Linn._ LŪTABELAIN (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; AKIA (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka.

Prostrate or procumbent herb with thick rootstock. Leaflets 5. Flowers
reddish, 2-4 together with a leaflet-like bract. Pod linear, slightly
torulose up to 1½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L. & Akik); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung
Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf to Khor
Attar).

It is said to be poisonous to cattle when young.


=L. glinoides= _Del._

Shrubby herb, 6-12 in. high. Leaflets 5. Flowers reddish, 1-4 together,
with a 3-fol. bract. Pod linear, subtorulose.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab).


=L. Garcini= _DC._

Shrubby herb, 6-12 in. high. Leaflets 3. Flowers reddish, solitary,
axillary sessile. Pod linear, nearly ½ in. long.

White Nile Prov.


=L. sp. near L. Ehrenbergii= _Schwfth._

Small herb, woody at base; stems and leaves villous; leaflets very
small, obovate. Flowers 3-4 in a cluster, pink. Pods linear, ¾ in. long,
pilose.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=L. corniculatus= _Linn._

Decumbent or ascending herb, usually small; leaflets 5, of which the
lower pair is close to the stem; flowers in an umbel of 5 or more; pod
cylindrical.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: high elevation).


=L. sp.=

Stems elongated, sparsely leafy, pilose. Leaves small, villous. Flowers
½ in. long; calyx lobes subulate, 2 mm. long.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


298 =Psoralea plicata= _Del._ RUBL or RUML (N. Kordn.)—Arab;
HURGIG—Hadendowa.

Low spiny shrub. Leaflets 3, deeply crenate and silvery pubescent.
Flowers 4-6 in axillary spikes; cor. creamy white. Pod villose, black.

Kassala Prov. (Um Adam); Berber Prov. (Nile banks); Blue Nile Prov.
(Rufaa); Fung Prov. (Singa); Kordofan Prov.


299 =Cyamopsis senegalensis= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Herb, 6-12 in. high. Leaves 3-7 pinnately fol. Flowers 4-6 in axillary
racemes, reddish. Pod linear, subtetragonous.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Dimehadit); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol).


300 =Indigofera linifolia= _Retz._

Annual, 6-9 in. high; leaves simple; pod globose. Flowers red, in
axillary racemes. Anthers, in this genus, with apiculate connective.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).

It is given medicinally in febrile eruptions.


=I. Dewevrei= _M. Mich._

Undershrub; stems angular. Leaves simple, linear, very acute, 2-2½ in.
long, shortly strigose-pubescent on both sides. Fls. axillary, solitary.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


=I. tetrasperma= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Much branched undershrub, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves simple linear. Flowers
scarlet, 1-2 in axils of leaves. Pod linear with a mucro.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Agada, Bongo-land: Sabbi).


=I. bongensis= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Small procumbent herb. Leaves simple, obovate. Fl. purple, in axillary
racemes. Pod narrow-linear, silky, ¾ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land & Bongo-land).


=I. achyranthoides= _Taubert._

Stems short from a woody rhizome, minutely pubescent. Leaves simple,
obovate-oblanceolate, acutely mucronate, very closely appressed-
puberulous. Racemes spike-like, axillary, 3½ in. long. Fls. at length
reflexed; calyx-lobes subulate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


=I. Schweinfurthii= _Taubert._

Leaves simple or up to 4-foliate; leaflets linear-oblanceolate acutely
mucronate, up to 2 in. long and ⅙ in. broad, appressed-setulose. Racemes
much longer than the leaves. Fls. very small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Kutshuk Ali & Bongo-land: by the Lehsi
River).


=I. arenaria= _A. Rich._

Small herb densely branched from base. Leaves usually simple rarely 3-5
fol. Flowers axile in subsessile abbreviated racemes; cor. bright
purple. Pod narrow-linear, silky, ½ in. long.

Suakin to Berber (Obak); Dongola Prov.


=I. pulchra= _Vahl._

Undershrub, 2-5 ft. high. Leaflets 3-7. Infl. various, panicled or
solitary; cor. scarlet, silky outside. Pod small, oblong, villose.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Kutshuk Ali).


=I. diphylla= _Vent._

Woolly herb or undershrub, up to 2 ft. high. Leaflets 2, terminal one
longer. Fl. pink in short dense, axillary racemes. Pod linear, beaked
silky, ½ in. long.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (50 m. east of El Fasher).


=I. bracteolata= _DC._ DERMA (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Undershrub, 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 3-5. Racemes with a leaflet-like
bract at the base of each reddish flower. Pod small, oblong, mucronate.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); North Kordofan Prov. (W. of Mazrul); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=I. strobilifera= _Hochst._

Herb, 1 ft. high. Leaflets 5-7. Flowers in dense heads with large
roundish bracts concealing the flowers. Pod small, oblong, subterete,
mucronate.

White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


=I. spinosa= _Forsk._ SANGADD—Hadendowa.

Branched shrub, with rigid spines 1½ in. long. Leaves simple and 3-fol.
Flowers red, solitary from the spines. Pod ½ in. long, linear,
mucronate, subtorulose.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit to 22° N.L.); between Suakin and Berber (Wadi
Arab).


=I. sparsa= _Baker._ =var. bongensis= _Baker fil._

Herb 9 in. high. Leaflets 3-7. Flowers red, solitary or in pairs,
axillary. Pod linear, glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


=I. suaveolens= _Jaub._ & _Spach._

Woody erect herb. Leaflets 3. Flowers solitary to 4 clustered laxly. Pod
linear, subtetragonous, 1 in. long.

Kordofan & Darfur Provinces; Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post).


=I. viscosa= _Lam._

Herb, 1-4 ft. high, branches clothed with glandular hairs; leaflets
7-13. Racemes axillary, 4-6 flowered. Cor. reddish. Pod linear, 1 in.
long.

Fung. Prov. (Saoleil); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad).


=I. pilosa= _Vahl._

Small herb, densely silky. Leaflets 3. Flowers solitary to 4 together,
axillary, pink. Pod linear, black when ripe.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Um Durein); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).


=I. dendroides= _Jacq._

Erect herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 21-31. Racemes lax, 8-12 flowered;
cor. pink. Pod narrow-linear, 1½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai).


=I. parviflora= _Heyne._

Herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 5-7. Fl. lilac, in short axillary racemes.
Pod linear, deflexed, silvery when young.

Nubia; Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El
Zeraf); Mongalla Prov.


=I. stenophylla= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Tall herb. Leaflets 7-13 short pet.; flowers purple or pink in lax
axillary racemes. Pod linear-mucronate, up to 2 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov.


=I. Welwitschii= _Baker._

Branched annual, 1 ft. high. Leaflets 3. Racemes of 4-9 bright red
flowers. Pod linear, upcurved.

Bahr El Ghazal (Bongo-land: Addai & Gir).


=I. pseudo-subulata= _Baker fil._

Herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves pinnately trifoliolate; leaflets oblong or
narrowly obovate. Racemes many-coloured; peduncle whitish hairy. Pod
straight, recurved at the apex, hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi & Niamniam-land: by the
Nabambisso River).


=I. subulata= _Vahl._

Annual or biennial, 2-3 ft. high. Leaflets 5. Racemes lax, axillary, of
ab. 20 flowers; cor. lilac. Pods narrow-linear, deflexed, 1-2 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=I. hirsuta= _Linn._

Villous herb, 2-3 ft. high, with spreading reddish hair. Leaves 5-7 fol.
Racemes dense, 2-5 in. long; cor. scarlet; pods deflexed, hairy, linear
¾ in. long.

Blue Nile Prov. (J. Moya); White Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.
(Opposite Tonga); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Um Durein); Mongalla Prov. (Kagulu,
Yei River District); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=I. paucifolia= _Del._ DAHASSIR—Arab; LO (Kenissa)—Dinka.

Bushy undershr. with variable leaves; leaflets 3-7; pods torulose,
linear, hoary. Flowers in dense axillary racemes; cor. scarlet, silvery
outside.

Northern Sudan; Blue Nile, White Nile, Kordofan, Darfur & Mongalla
Provinces.

Good camel fodder. The root, boiled in milk used as a purgative.


=I. oblongifolia= _Forsk._ DAHASSIR (Blue Nile)—Arab.

Shrub, silver in all its parts. Leaflets 3-5, obovate-oblong, appressed
pubescent on both surfaces, about ½ in. long. Pod torulose, glaucous,
6-8-seeded, ⅔ in. long.

Khartoum Prov. (6th Cataract); Blue Nile and Kordofan Provinces.


=I. astragalina= _DC._

Herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 7-11, white hairy. Racemes dense, 1-4 in.
long. Cor. yellow; pods narrow-linear, ½ in. long.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Surutj).


=I. alternans= _DC._

Prostrate herb with silvery hairs. Leaflets 7-9. Racemes dense 12-20
flowered. Cor. violet; pods deflected, linear, ½ in. long.

Darfur Prov. (foothills of Jeb. Marra 5,000 ft.).

=var. paucijuga= _Schwfth._

Leaflets 3-5. Pods ⅓ in. long.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Haraza).


=I. semitrijuga= _Forsk._ EL SHEREI’A (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Bushy herb, glaucous-silvery. Leaflets 3 pairs and an odd one, which is
stalked. Racemes 6-12 flowered. Pods linear, ¾ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (coast); between Suakin & Berber; Berber Prov. (near Abu
Hamed); Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.


=I. Garckeana= _Vatke._

Shrub with winged stems. Leaves pinnate. Leaflets 7-11, ovate or
elliptic, 1½-2 cm. long, about 1 cm. broad, finely appressed-pubescent.
Racemes dense, ¾ as long as the leaves, with long linear bracts. Pods
reflexed, 2 in. long, strigose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=I. Quartiniana= _A. Rich._

Undershrub, 2-3 ft. high. Leaflets 5-7, thinly silky. Racemes short;
cor. purplish. Pod linear, spreading, 1½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (coast, 22° N.L.).


=I. Binderi= _Kotschy._

Scabrous undershrub. Leaflets 3-7, obovate, emarginate and mucronate.
Racemes of ab. 20 flowers.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land:
Addai).


=I. Schimperi= _Jaub._ & _Spach._

Much branched shrub, up to 10 ft. high, silvery. Leaflets 5-7, obovate.
Flowers purplish, ab. 20 in close, axillary racemes. Pod linear, 1 in.
long, deflexed.

Red Sea Prov.


=I. secundiflora= _Poir._

Bushy herb, clothed with red or greyish hairs mixed with stalked glands.
Leaves subsessile, 9-13 fol. Racemes dense; cor. reddish. Pod linear-
oblong, ¾ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=I. microcarpa= _Desv._

Canescent annual or biennial. Leaflets 8-12, opposite, oblanceolate,
rounded at the apex. Racemes rather lax-flowered, shorter than the
leaves. Pods ellipsoid, ⅙ in. long, strigose.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=I. articulata= _Gouan._

Shrub, up to 12 ft. high, very glaucous. Leaflets 9, opposite, obovate,
appressed-pubescent. Racemes about ⅓ as long as the leaves. Pods sickle-
shaped, tomentose, torulose, ½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov.; Berber Prov. (Barbadiap, Atbara); Blue Nile Prov. (J.
Kon); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé); Red Sea Prov. (Khor Aiet).


=I. argentea= _Linn._ NIL BALADI—Arab.

Much-branched shrub, silvery. Leaflets 9, silvery on both sides,
obovate. Racemes of 12-20 yellow flowers. Pod falcate, terete,
deflected, ½ in. long.

Nubia; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé).

Yields an indigo.


=I. arrecta= _Hochst._

Much-branched shrub, silky. Leaflets 13-17, oblanceolate, turn black
when dried. Racemes of 6-12 yellow flowers. Pod deflexed, linear, up to
¾ in. long.

Blue Nile Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, near Gindi, 7,400 ft.); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land & Mittu-land).

The chief Indigo producing plant in Africa, largely cultivated in Java.


=I. tinctoria= _Linn._

Bushy shrub, 2-4 ft. high, with white appressed hairs. Leaflets 7-11;
pod linear, cylindrical, apiculate.

Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa); Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (El
Obeid); Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).

Yields a large percentage of the Indigo of commerce. It is also suitable
for green manure.


=I. emarginella= _Steud._

Undershrub, 3-4 ft. high, almost glabrous. Leaflets 9, obovate, apex
rounded, mucronate. Flowers yellow, in dense axillary conical racemes.
Pod narrow-linear, deflexed, ¾ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Sueh River).


=I. anabaptista= _Steud._

Branched shrub. Leaflets 3-5 oblong-oblanceolate up to 1 in. long,
appressed-pilose. Racemes very short. Flowers and pods reflexed, the
latter curved, flat, ¾ in. long, laxly pubescent.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Berber Prov. (Zeidab & Shendi); Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad).


=I. aspera= _Perr._

Herb, 1 ft. or more high. Leaflets 5, linear-lanceolate, silvery.
Flowers pink, 20-30 in axillary racemes, 2-3 in. long. Pod deflexed,
narrow-linear, 1 in. long.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.


=I. arabica= _Jaub._ & _Spach._

Branched, bushy herb, silky. Leaflets 3-5 obovate, lateral ones often
folded, with decurved point. Racemes axillary short, of 6-10 scarlet
flowers. Pod linear-oblong, mucronate, subtorulose, under ½ in. long.

White Nile Prov.


=I. cordifolia= _Roth._

Bushy herb, 6-9 in. high, densely villous. Leaves simple, cordate-ovate.
Flowers red, in dense axillary clusters, 3-6 together. Pods oblong,
cuspidate, minute.

Nubia; Blue Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


=I. conjugata= _Baker_

Shrubby; branches almost 4-angled. Leaflets 3, the terminal one up to 2½
in. long and up to ½ in. broad. Racemes axillary; short-stalked, of 20
fl. and more. Cor. yellowish. Pod deflexed, linear, 1 in. long.

White Nile Prov.


=I. capitata= _Kotschy._

Shrub. Leaflets 7-9. Flowers in dense, rounded terminal heads, 1 in.
broad; bracts pinnate. Pod oblong, small.

White Nile & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.


=I. parvula= _Del._

Trailing herb; leaflets 3, small cuneate. Flowers in lax, subsessile
clusters of 2-4. Pod linear, ½ in. long.

Nubia; Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=I. costata= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Scabrous herb. Leaflets 13-15. Racemes slender, axillary, 2-3 in. long.
Cor. pink. Pod linear, deflexed, 1 in. long.

Darfur Prov.


=I. oxalidea= _Welw._

Small herb. Leaflets 3-5, the lateral ones alternate. Racemes lax, of
6-20 purplish flowers. Pod deflexed, linear, under ½ in. long; style
persistent.

Fung Prov. (Harun forest); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=I. endecaphylla= _Jacq._

Bushy herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaflets 7-9, oblong. Racemes dense, 1-4 in.
long. Cor. purple. Pod linear, deflexed, ¾ in. long.

Nubia; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Mongalla
Prov. (Mongalla).


=I. orthocarpa= _Baker._

Branched undershrub; pods cylindrical, straight, deflexed. Leaflets
9-13, obovate. Racemes sessile, 10-20 flowered; cor. yellow.

Nubia (from Berber southwards); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; White
Nile Prov. (Jebelein); Kordofan Prov.


=I. suffruticosa= _Mill._

Undershrub. Leaflets about 10, oblong or obovate. Pods much curved, ⅔
in. long.

Blue Nile Prov. (J. Moya).


=I. tritoides= _Baker._

Prostrate herb. Leaflets 3, obovate, very acute, up to 1 in. long,
densely appressed-pilose. Racemes elongated, lax-flowered. Pods nearly
straight, 1¾ in. long, shortly pubescent.

Nubia (Suakin to Berber).


=I. near Bainesii= _Baker._

Erect undershrub; pods recurved, nearly ½ in. long. Leaves simple,
narrowly obovate, ⅓ in. long, closely appressed hairy.

Red Sea Prov. (Port Sudan & Dongonab).


301 =Helminthocarpum abyssinicum= _A. Rich._

Wiry, silky herb, 1 ft. high. Leaflets 7. Flowers 4-6 together in short-
stalked axillary heads. Cor. yellow and red, twice the length of calyx.
Pods small, spirally twisted, of 1 spiral only or less.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 7,000 ft.).


302 =Biserula Pelecinus= _L._

Slender herb. Leaves pinnate. Leaflets about 12 pairs, obovate, widely
emarginate, ⅙ in. long, pilose. Flowers in axillary racemes, few. Fruits
flat, 1 in. long, with broad dentate wings.

Darfur Prov. (J. Kurku: Darfur Plain, 3,600 ft.).


303 =Tephrosia humilis= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Herb, under 1 ft. high. Leaflets 9-11, linear-oblong, silky beneath.
Racemes leaf-opposed, of 6-12 pink flowers; anthers, in this genus, not
apiculate. Pod downy, linear, upcurved, up to 2 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=T. nana= _Kotschy._

Small herb; leaflets 9-11, linear-oblanceolate. Racemes leaf-opposed, of
6-12 purple flowers. Pod linear, falcate, silky.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


=T. Vogelii= _Hook. f._ DAWA NA SAMAKI—Arab (Tuku-Tuku dialect).

Shrub, 10 ft. high, with rusty-silky tomentum. Racemes terminal, of
20-30 flowers, 4-6 in. long. Cor. violet, rarely white, ab. 1 in. deep;
style bearded. Pod 5 in. long, ½ in. broad, brown-velvety. Leaflets
17-25.

Mongalla Prov. (Opari District); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the
Yuru River).

Used to stupefy fish, the leaves and branches are pounded and thrown on
the surface of the water; the fish rise after a few minutes and are
quite wholesome and fit for food.


=T. aff. T. hirtæ.= _Boj._

Stout, bushy herb with fulvous hairs; pods densely villous.

Mongalla Prov.


=T. Kotschyana= _Hochst._

Leaflets linear-lanceolate, about 2 in. long, finely appressed pilose
below; lateral nerves numerous, ascending. Racemes long-stalked, lax-
flowered. Pods falcate, 2 in. long, puberulous, about 10-seeded.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=T. linearis= _Pers._

Copiously branched perennial. Leaflets 5-17 linear, grey-hairy. Racemes
lax, 4-8 flowered. Cor. reddish. Pod linear, 1-2 in. long, narrow,
downy.

Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land).


=T. nubica= _Baker._ UM SABA (Medani)—Arab.

Much-branched undershrub, 12-18 in. high; stems woolly. Racemes terminal
or leaf-opposed, 6-12 flowered; cor. pink. Pods densely white-silky,
1-seeded.

Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Serg).


=T. obcordata= _Baker._ IDEINAT EL FAR (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Woody herb or undershrub. Stem and leaves white woolly. Plant often
adorned by white feathery tassel-like galls. Leaves subsessile, simple,
obcordate.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur-Kordofan border, 13° N. Lat.


=T. rigida= _Baker._

Undershrub. Leaflets 13-17, linear. Racemes terminal, dense, 2-4 in.
long. Cor. pale-red. Pod 2 in. long, ¼ in. broad, slightly upcurved.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=T. purpurea= _Pers._

Much-branched perennial, 1-2 ft. high; leaflets 5-10 pair and a terminal
one, on pilose stalk; pods ab. 1½ in. linear, slightly curved,
mucronate.

Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid).

Fresh root-bark ground and made into a pill with a little black pepper,
is frequently given in cases of obstinate colic.

=var. pubescens= _Baker._

Darfur Prov.


=T. leptostachya= _DC._

Stems ultimately glabrous, but pod silky, slightly falcate, 1¾ in. long.
Leaflets about 14, mucronate, 1 in. long, shortly appressed-pubescent.
Flowers few, in long lax racemes.

Fung Prov. (Disa); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad).


=T. Apollinea= _DC._ AMAYOK—Arab.

Bushy herb, 12-18 in. high. Leaflets 5-9, oblong. Racemes terminal or
lateral, loosely 6-12 flowered; cor. red. Pod narrow-linear, 1½ in.
long.

Red Sea Prov. (22° N.L.); Wadi Halfa; Dongola Prov. (Merowe); Berber
Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Medani); Fung Prov.; Kordofan
Prov.

Said to be used to adulterate Senna.


=T. vicioides= _A. Rich._

Diffusely-branched herb, silky. Leaflets 7-9, obovate-oblong. Flowers
purple, axillary, solitary or in pairs. Pod 1 in. long, narrow-linear,
recurved.

Berber Prov. (Shendi); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad).


=T. lathyroides= _Guill._ & _Perr._ UM SABA (Medani)—Arab.

Herb. Leaves pinnate 5-foliolate; leaflets lanceolate, subacute, about
1¼ in. long, thinly setulose. Flowers axillary, clustered. Pod slightly
curved, 1¾ in. long, thinly pilose, about 8 seeded.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Leimab); Blue Nile Prov. (Medani);
Kordofan Prov.


=T. uniflora= _Pers._

Bushy herb. Leaves about 8-foliolate; leaflets very silky, oblanceolate,
mucronate, ½-⅔ in. long. Flowers axillary, solitary or paired. Pod
slightly curved, 2 in. long, shortly pubescent.

Between Suakin & Berber (Omareg); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile
Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (El Greo).


=T. lupinifolia= _DC._ KEREIWIT EL GHURAB (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Wide trailing perennial with digitate leaves; leaflets 5-7. Racemes
terminal or leaf-opposed, up to 1 ft. long; corolla reddish. Pod linear,
sometimes oblong, 1-6 seeded.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Plains 40-80 m. N.E. of El Fasher).


=T. emeroides= _A. Rich._ SUREP (Medani)—Arab.

Somewhat woody herb. Leaves pinnately 5-7 fol. Flowers yellow, solitary
to 3 in the axils of leaves. Pods 2 in. long, narrow, densely rusty-
tomentose.

Blue Nile Prov. (Medani).


=T. dichroocarpa= _Steud._

Tall, hairy herb or undershrub. Leaflets 11-15. Racemes terminal, 6-9
in. long; cor. red. Pod narrow, silky, 2 in. long.

Fung Prov.


=T. fulvinervis= _Hochst._

Herb, 2-3 ft. high; tawny silky. Leaflets 9-13, linear, the midrib
tawny. Racemes lateral with 3-4 distant, tawny-silky flowers. Pod 2 in.
long, narrow, silky.

Kordofan Prov.


=T. subtriflora= _Hochst._

Perennial. Leaflets 5-7. Flowers 1-3, sessile in axils of the leaves;
cor. purple. Pod 1¼ in. long, narrow.

Dongola & Kordofan Provinces.


=T. anthylloides= _Hochst._ UM ATFEIR—Arab.

Bushy herb or undershrub, 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 7-9. Flowers 1-3
axillary, purple. Pod up to 2½ in. long.

Khartoum Prov. (J. Malakit); Blue Nile, White Nile, Kordofan & Mongalla
Provinces.


=T. longipes= _Meissn._

Herb; leaflets up to 9, linear, up to 2 in. long. Racemes terminal and
lateral, of 6-10 purple flowers. Pod 2 in. long; linear, straight.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


=T. incana= _Graham._

Grey woolly undershrub or herb. Leaflets 11-13 oblanceolate. Racemes
terminal or lateral, 6-12 in. long, lower flowers in clusters of 3-4;
cor. reddish. Pod deflexed and recurved, 2 in. long, very silky.

Kordofan Prov. (Gefil).


304 =Mundulea suberosa= _Benth._

Small tree or large arborescent shrub; young twigs pilose; leaflets
13-23. Racemes terminal and leaf-opposed 4-6 in. long; cor. red. Pod 3-5
in. long and under ½ in. broad, torulose, silky.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500 ft.).


305 =Milletia Barteri= _Dunn._

Leaflets 4 pairs and an odd one, opposite, obovate-elliptic, obtusely
acuminate, 3-4 in. long, 2 in. broad, glabrous. Flowers rose, in large
panicles. Calyx cupular, silky.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Yabo River).


306 =Sesbania punctata= _DC._ TAURI—Arab.

Erect shrub with paripinnate leaves. Leaflets 20-50 pair. Racemes 6-12
flowered; corolla yellow, much spotted with purple. Pod 8-12 in. long.

Nubia; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Kordofan Prov.

Recommended for growing as a green manure.


=S. ægyptiaca= _Pers._ SESABAN—Arab; KAILKAIL (Dilling) & KENTII (J.
Eliri)—Nuba.

Copiously branched shrub, 6-10 ft. high. Leaflets 10-20 pairs; pod
pendulous, narrowly linear, usually somewhat twisted, 6-8 in. long.
Racemes 6-12 flowered; cor. yellow.

Found in most parts of the Sudan. In India the bark is made into ropes,
and the wood into charcoal; the leaves furnish cattle fodder. It is very
quick-growing and forms a good temporary shelter for slower-growing
plants.


=S. ægyptiaca= _Pers._ =var. bicolor= _Wight_ & _Arn._ SENA—Arab.

Standard petal and tips of wing-petals suffused with purple.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Berber Prov. (Zeidab); Khartoum Prov.; Fung,
White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


=S. aculeata= _Pers._

Erect herb, 2-4 ft. high; branches ascending, more or less prickly.
Leaflets 20-50 pairs; pod 6-9 in. long, erect or spreading, not twisted.
Cor. pale yellow.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile Prov.

Yields a fibre durable under water, and useful for ropes and fishing
nets. Suitable for a green manure.


=S. microphylla= _Harms._

Small herb; flowers yellow mottled with purple or black spots. Leaflets
very small, about ⅙ in. long. Pod 4½ in. long, linear, moniliform.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ghabat El Arab).


=S. mossambicensis= _Klotzsch._

Small herb; corolla standard striate, not mottled. Leaflets as in
preceding species. Pod 2½ in. long, moniliform.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Yubbo River).


=S. pachycarpa= _DC._

Annual, 1-3 ft. high; corolla dotted; pod about 6 in. long, ¼ in. broad.
Leaflets 15-20 pairs, linear-oblong, ½-¾ in. long.

Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=S. arabica= _Hochst._ SURA & TAURI (Blue Nile)—Arab.

Claws of corolla appendaged; standard conspicuously spotted. A tall
herb. Leaflets up to 30 pairs, linear-oblong, ⅔ in long. Pods much
constricted between the seeds.

Fung Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


=S. tetraptera= _Hochst._ SURIB (Fung), & ?KOL (White Nile)—Arab.

Shrubby herb up to 3 or 4 ft. high. Pod 4-winged. Leaflets 15-20 pairs.
Racemes 4-6 flowered; cor. yellow.

Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Nuba Mts. Prov.

The leaves are eaten as a pot-herb.


307 =Astragalus prolixus= _Sieb._

Prostrate herb, 1 ft. or more long, silky. Leaves imparipinnate;
leaflets 11-13. Racemes 6-12 flowered. Pod oblong-turgid, partly divided
inside by a longitudinal membrane, ¼ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Dongola Prov.; between Berber & Khartoum;
Khartoum Prov.

May be one of the several species which yield “Gum-Tragacanth.”


=A. abyssinicus= _Steud._

Shrubby herb, 3-4 ft. long. Side-leaflets 10-15 pair. Racemes dense, 4-6
long. Cor. yellow. Pod 1 in. long, linear, completely divided inside by
a longitudinal membrane.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 8-9,000 ft.).


308 =Glycyrrhiza glabra= _Linn._

Leaves odd-pinnate; leaflets about 6 pairs, oblong-lanceolate,
emarginate, 1½ in. long, ⅔ in. broad, gland-dotted below. Flowers in
slender axillary racemes half as long as the leaves.

Sudan; Libyan Desert (Khor Wau).


309 =Taverniera lappacea= _DC._

Stems procumbent, shrubby. Joints of the pods with rigid hooked
bristles. Leaves 3-fol. Flowers yellowish, axillary, solitary or in
pairs.

Nubia.


=T. ægyptica= _Boiss._

Much-branched low shrub; pods densely bristly. Leaves simple, obovate-
cuneate. Flowers solitary or in pairs, axillary.

Nubia.


310 =Alhagi maurorum= _Desv._

Low shrub, 1-3 ft. high, armed with spreading spines, 1 in. long. Leaves
simple, obovate-oblong, drooping from spines and branches. Flowers red,
solitary or in pairs from the spines. Pod falcate, 1 in. long.

Nubia.

Said to yield “manna.” The plant has antibilious properties.


311 =Herminiera Elaphroxylon= _Guill._ & _Perr._ AMBATCH, AMBAJ &
TUROR—Arab; ADĪT (Kenissa) & WOR (Renk)—Dinka; RUR & TYEF—Nuer.

Small tree with showy yellow flowers and prickly branches. Stems swollen
at base consist of pith-like substance. Leaves abruptly pinnate; stamens
monadelphous; pods spirally contorted.

Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile (from Abba Island southwards) & affluents;
Kordofan Prov. (Rahad).

The swollen stems which consist of pith, are used to make rafts and
canoes. This species is very similar to _Æschynomene Pfundii_ Taub.


=H. excelsa= _Kotschy._ ?ADDIT (Renk)—Dinka.

White Nile Prov.

This and the next species are known only by name.


=H. humilis= _Kotschy._

Fung Prov.


312 =Æschynomene uniflora= _E. Meyer._

Shrubby up to 4 ft. high. Legumes deeply sinuate, dividing into
dissepiments. Leaflets 10-20 pair, sensitive. Flowers mostly solitary,
yellow.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


=Æ. Indica= _Linn._

Annual, 1-3 ft. high. Leaflets 40-70, alternate, sessile; pod 1-1½ in.,
narrow, slightly curved, glabrous. Flowers pale yellow, 2-4 in. lax,
short-peduncled racemes.

Kordofan Prov. (in marshes); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir,
Shambé, Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov. (Bor); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post).


=Æ. cristata= _Vatke._

Shrub with hollow stems. Leaflets about 20 pairs, narrowly oblong, ⅓ in.
long, nearly glabrous. Flowers few, axillary, pedunculate. Petals
crested. Pods flat, breaking up into segments.

Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


=Æ. Rüppellii= _Baker._

Low shrub; twigs viscid, brown. Leaflets 8-12 pair. Racemes axillary 6-8
flowered; cor. yellow. Pods ¼ in. long, with 2 constricted joints.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=Æ. nilotica= _Taub._

Twiggy. Leaves very short. Leaflets about 12 pairs, oblong, mucronate, ⅙
in. long. Flowers subsolitary. Petals slightly fringed.

White Nile Prov. (by J. Nyemati).


=Æ. Pfundii= _Taub._

Shrub 6-8 ft., with soft wood. Leaflets numerous, oblong, serrulate, 1
in. long. Flowers few in racemes. Calyx villous. Petals not crested.
Pods ¾ in. broad, pilose, breaking up into narrowly oblong segments.

Kordofan Prov. (Bir Rahad); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).

This species closely resembles _Herminiera Elaphroxylon_ G. & P., but
branches not spiny.


=Æ. aspera= _Linn. f._

Perennial 2-4 ft. high, stem spongy, pith-like; pod 3-4 in. long, over ¼
in. wide, nearly straight, 6-7 jointed, each joint with sharp asperities
in the centre. Leaflets 40-70 or more.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).

The Sola Pith Plant of commerce. The soft pith-like wood is used in
India to make helmets, floats, toys, etc. It is also used in surgery for
the manufacture of tampons.


=Æ. Telekii= _Schwfth._

Tree. Leaflets numerous, narrowly oblong, ⅓ in. long, glabrous. Flowers
solitary, pedicellate, large. Petals crested. Pods with yellowish
bristly hairs, flat, 3 in. long, not jointed.

Banks of the Nile.


=Æ. Schimperi= _Hochst._

Annual, 2-3 ft. high.; pod articulated, smooth or bristly, divisions
10-15. Leaflets 12-30 pairs, sensitive. Flowers solitary or in pairs,
axillary.

White Nile Prov.


313 =Smithia Kotschyi= _Benth._

Erect shrub; branches covered with weak yellow bristles. Leaflets 20
pairs. Racemes axillary, 6-12 flowered. Pod 7-8 jointed, small.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=S. Schweinfurthii= _Taub._

Shrub with long leafy branches with scattered hairs. Leaflets about 10
pairs, obliquely oblong, 3-nerved at the base, ⅓ in. long. Flowers with
leathery striate bracts and sepals nearly hiding the corolla.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: by the Doguru).


314 =Stylosanthes flavicans= _Baker._

Copiously branched herb. Leaves 3-fol. Flowers in dense terminal heads;
bracts densely imbricated; stamens monadelphous. Pod ¼ in. long, with 2
articulations.

Kordofan Prov.


315 =Arachis hypogæa= _Linn._ FUL-SUDANI—Arab; BUL GWATH (Zeraf)—Nuer;
WANDE—Zande. The Earth-nut or Monkey-nut.

Diffuse herb. Leaflets 4. Flowers axillary, solitary, yellow. The pod
buries itself in the ground to ripen.

Cultivated everywhere for food.


316 =Zornia diphylla= _Pers._

Prostrate or ascending annual. Leaflets 2, dotted; stamens monadelphous;
pod indehiscent, jointed; joints 2-5, set with short straight spines.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).

A useful fodder.


317 =Desmodium spirale= _DC._

Annual 1-2 ft. high. Leaflets 3. Racemes terminal and axillary; cor.
greenish and purple. Pod ½ in. long with 4-6 joints, often spirally
twisted.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=D. gangeticum= _DC._

Procumbent herb; leaves 1 fol.; flowers rose-red; pod small, sessile,
somewhat curved, joints 4-8.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: shady Khors and woody places); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=D. dimorphum= _Welw._

Branched undershrub, 2 ft. high. Leaves oblong, rounded or cordate at
base. Racemes 1 in. long, sessile, axillary and terminal; cor. red. Pod
¼ in. long, lower margin deeply sinuate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=D. lasiocarpum= _DC._

Erect undershrub, 3-6 ft. high, densely brown pubescent.

Leaves cordate-ovate, 4-5 in. long. Racemes axillary and terminal; cor.
red. Pod ¾ in. long, hispid, 4-5; jointed lower margin deeply sinuate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, Niamniam-land).


=D. sennaarense= _Schwfth._

Densely hispid undershrub. Stipules cordate, amplexicaul; leaflets 3,
central ovate, 3-4 in. long. Racemes stalked; corolla reddish. Pod 1 in.
long, joints 4 to 6, lower margin slightly waved.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung. Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El
Zeraf).


=D. Scalpe= _DC._

Erect undershrub. Leaves 3-fol., ovate, 1½-2½ in., the terminal somewhat
larger, rhomboidal; flowers light red, in pairs on terminal panicles;
pods constricted; joints 3-4, as broad as long, much sinuate.

Blue Nile Prov. (Geneib Assad); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Wadi Gindi,
7,300 ft.).


=D. Dregeanum= _Benth._

Grey silky undershrub. Leaflets 3. Flowers in short terminal panicles.
Pod ½ in. long, slightly waved beneath, 2-4 jointed.

Æthiopia.


=D. paleaceum= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Semi-woody, erect, 3-4 ft. high. Leaflets 3, central ovate, 3-5 in.
long. Racemes axillary and terminal, stalked; cor. reddish. Pod ab. ¾
in. long, slightly indented below, articulations 4-5, stiff-hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=D. delicatulum= _A. Rich._

Annual, 9 in. high, silky. Lower leaves simple, upper 3-fol. Racemes
terminal, sessile, 2-4 flowered. Pod ab. ½ in. long, 4-6 jointed,
glabrous, lower suture indented ⅓ down.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=D. triflorum= _DC._

Matted, trailing herb. Leaves small, lower ones often 1-fol., otherwise
3-fol., glabrous ab. slightly silky beneath; flowers very small, usually
3 together in axils of leaves; pods up to ½ in. long, slightly
constricted on ventral margin, 2-4 jointed.

Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).

Would make a good green manure and cover crop.


318 =Pseudarthria confertiflora= _Baker._

Erect undershrub. Leaflets 3, terminal one 3-4 in. long, ovate-oblong.
Racemes axillary and terminal, the latter often compound. Pod linear,
not articulated.

White Nile Prov.


=P. Hookeri= _Wight_ & _Arn._

Undershrub, 3-4 ft. high, downy. Leaflets 3, central obovate, 4-6 in.
long. Flowers red, in dense terminal panicles. Pod 1 in. long, linear,
torulose, downy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai & Niamniam-land: Nganye).


=P. sp.=

Leaflets 3, the central ovate, acute, 5 in. long, 3 in. broad, softly
pubescent below, widely crenate. Flowers very small in lax terminal
panicles.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-land: Kulensho).


319 =Uraria picta= _Desv._

Semi-shrubby perennial; leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 5-7; flowers
small, blue, in dense cylindrical spikes, up to 18 in. long.

Banks of the White Nile; Mongalla Prov.: Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).

Reported to be a remedy for snakebite in India.


320 =Alysicarpus monilifer= _DC._ FERAISHA (Kordofan)—Arab.

Diffuse herb. Leaves small, 1-fol., ovate, usually cordate; pods with
2-6 globose, pubescent swellings. Racemes axillary and terminal.

Kordofan Prov.


=A. vaginalis= _DC._

Diffuse herb, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves up to 2 in. long, 1-fol., variable in
shape; pod glabrous, little or not moniliform, ½-¾ in. long. Racemes
denser than above.

Nubia; South Kordofan Prov. (Um Durein); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek & Niamniam-land: by the Ibba River).


=A. Zeyheri= _Hard._

Branched perennial, 1 ft. high. Leaflet 1, cordate-oblong. Racemes
terminal, lax, ¾ in. long. Pod under ½ in. long with 3-4 distinct
constrictions.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Gir).


=A. rugosus= _DC._ SHELĪNI (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Copiously branched herb, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves 1-fol., linear-oblong;
corolla violet purple; pods moniliform, much wrinkled, 2-5 jointed,
short.

Nubia; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Upper White
Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé).


321 =Cicer arietinum= _Linn._ HUMMUS—Arab; Chick Pea or Gram.

Annual, up to 18 in. high. Leaves pinnate, rachis ending in a tendril;
leaflets 12-16, deep-dentate. Flowers purple, solitary, axillary. Pod
oblong, silky, ¾ in. long.

Cultivated generally.


322 =Vicia faba= _Linn._ FUL—Arab. The Bean plant.

Cultivated generally.


323 =Lens esculentus= _Moench._ ’ADS SURGAM (Dongola)—Arab.

Dongola Prov. (Cultivated).


324 =Lathyrus sativus= _Linn._ GILBAN—Arab. Chickling Vetch.

Herb. Leaves 2-fol., the rachis ending in a tendril. Flowers reddish-
purple, solitary, axillary. Pod 1½ in. long, oblong, narrowly winged on
each side of the dorsal suture.

Cultivated mainly in North Sudan.


325 =Abrus precatorius= _Linn._ HABIL ER RUS or HABILARUS—Arab;
YAGOMO—Golo.

Twining perennial. Leaves abruptly pinnate, deciduous; leaflets 10-15
pairs; inflorescence shorter than leaves; cor. reddish; pods oblong;
seed polished, bright scarlet, tipped with black.

Fung & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.

The root is said to be a substitute for liquorice. The seeds are used as
a purgative, only small doses being given. They are also used in
affections of the eyes. When raw, the seeds are poisonous, but the
active principle, Abrin, is destroyed by boiling.


=A. pulchellus= _Willd._

Differs from above by having inflorescence longer than leaves, which
have only 5-10 pairs of leaflets; pods linear and seeds black. Cor.
pale-purple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=A. Schimperi= _Hochst._

Shrub with slender woody branches; seeds dark brown. Leaflets 12-15
pairs. Racemes lax, 3-4 in. long; cor. reddish.

Nubia (Ronga); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi).


326 =Clitoria ternatea= _Linn._ ERG EL AGRAB & TAWILA (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Arab; GRENAME (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves imparipinnate, with stipels; 5-7-fol. Flowers
large, over 1 in. long; corolla blue (in wild plants light blue);
standard very large; pod linear, ab. 3 in. long.

Nubia; Khartoum Prov. (cultivated); Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.
(Jebelein, White Nile Prov. to Meshra El Zeraf); Upper White Nile Prov.

The root is powerful cathartic, like jalap; the powdered seeds are also
purgative. An infusion of leaves is used for eruptions, and the pounded
root is applied to scorpion stings.


327 =Glycine hedysaroides= _Willd._

Climbing perennial. Leaflets 3. Flowers 4-6 in axillary racemes. Cor.
pale red. Pod 1½ in. long, straight, flat, 5-6 seeded.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=G. Borianii= _Baker._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves 1-3 fol.; flowers red, 12-20 in subsessile
axillary racemes. Pod linear, silky, 2-seeded.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=G. javanica= _Linn._

Herbaceous twiner; young shoots very silky. Leaves 3-fol., with stipels;
corolla bright red, in copious peduncled axillary racemes, linear,
nearly straight, silky, 4-6 seeded.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


328 =Teramnus labialis= _Spreng._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves 3-fol.; flowers small, reddish, in very lax
racemes; pods linear up to 2 in. long; tipped with a short stout beak or
hook.

Nubia; Fung Prov. (Karkoj); Kordofan Prov. (Melbes); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (by the Kit); Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Tombé).


329 =Erythrina tomentosa= _R. Br._ ’ZĀN (Baggara), BET EL ARUS &
HABILARUS—Arab; SHUMTI (Dilling)—Nuba; ARIENGO—Jur; BANGRIBAKAKE—Zande.

Shrub to middle sized tree with trifol. leaves; flowers orange red, in
dense spikes, appearing before the leaves; pods constricted; seeds
scarlet.

Nuba Mts. & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.


=E. Brucei= _Schwfth._

Moderate sized tree with short, stout spines on the young stem and
branches. Leaves 3-fol.; flowers scarlet, appearing before the leaves;
pods constricted.

Khartoum Prov. (Introduced).


=E. Dybowskii= _Hua._

Leaflets very broadly ovate-triangular, emarginate, 3 in. long and about
4 in. broad, softly tomentellous on both surfaces; petioles with
reflexed prickles. Pods tomentose, constricted.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


330 =Mucuna pruriens= _DC._ KOPA—Zande. Cow-Itch.

Semi-woody twiner. Leaves 3-fol. with stipels, pubescent above, with
dense silvery hair beneath. Flowers large, dark purple, in drooping
racemes; pods up to 3 in. long, covered with orange-brown irritant
hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi, also Niamniam-land).

The young pods are cooked and eaten as a vegetable, but when ripe they
are covered with hairs which are exceedingly irritating. Various
medicinal properties are attributed to the roots and seeds.


331 =Canavalia virosa= _Wight_ & _Arn._

Herbaceous climber. Leaves 3-fol., with stipels; flowers nearly white to
bright pink; pod 4 in. long by 1½ in. wide, thickened on either side of
the dorsal suture.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: by the Yokko).


=C. regalis= _Dunn._ TAMBUI (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves 3-fol. with stipels; pods up to 9 in. long,
thickened on either side of the dorsal suture; seeds nearly 1 in. long,
deep pink.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

In the Bahr El Ghazal bracelets of strung seed are worn to bring luck in
the chase.


=C. ensiformis= _DC._ LUBIA EL FIL (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; BOLUKI
(Dilling)—Nuba; NZERAHNA—Krej.

Strong herbaceous climber. Leaves 3-fol.; flowers pink; pod about 6 in.
long with a rib on either side of the dorsal suture; seeds dark.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper White
Nile, Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.

The Sword Bean, wild and cultivated.


332 =Phaseolus lunatus= _Linn._ Lima, Burma, Sugar, or Butter Bean.

Twining herb. Leaves 3-fol., central leaflet ovate-deltoid, 4 in. long.
Racemes axillary; cor. violet. Pod 3 in. long, flat, broad crescent-
shaped.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Cultivated).

The ripe seeds contain Prussic acid, which is, however, destroyed in
cooking.


=P. Mungo= _Linn._ GESHARINGEIK (Sudan) & KASHARINGI (Egypt)—Arab;
BAKWA—Bongo; ABAGPA—Zande.

Sub-erect annual, yellowish hairy. Leaflets 3. Racemes axillary, 4-6
flowered; cor. yellowish. Pod linear, terete 2 in. long, tawny hairy.

Cultivated.

In Basutoland the seeds are used by the natives to mature boils,
abscesses, etc. The seeds are chewed and applied to the sore. The green
pods and seeds are used for food, and the whole plant for fodder.


=P. adenanthus= _E. Meyer._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves 3-fol., with stipels; flowers pink; pod 5-6
in. long and over ½ in. wide; seeds 12-16, almost circular, black.

Nubia; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.

The tuberous root is eaten in India.


=P. vulgaris= _Linn._ LUBIA KHADRA or LUBIA HAMRA—Arab. The Kidney,
French, or Haricot Bean.

Climbing annual. Leaflets 3. Peduncles in pairs, 2-3-flowered; cor.
white or lilac. Pod 5 in. long, straight.

Cultivated.


=P. stenocarpus= _Harms._

Twiner with wiry stems. Leaves trifoliolate; leaflets ovate-lanceolate,
obtuse, 1½-2 in. long, glabrous. Flowers very small. Pods linear,
falcate, 3 in. long, glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land: Kulengo).


=P. trilobus= _Ait._

Prostrate perennial. Leaves 3-fol.; leaflets deeply sinuate-lobate;
stipules peltately attached; pod 1-1½ in. long, linear. Flowers 2-4 on
3-6 in. long peduncles, reddish.

Cultivated.

Yields pulse.


=P. sp.=

Leaves long-petiolate, trifoliolate; leaflets ovate, mucronate, 4-5 in.
long, 2½-3 in. broad, laxly reticulate, minutely setulose. Flowers and
fruits not seen.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (mouth of Bahr El Arab; in Sudd, Schwfth. 1133).


333 =Vigna incana= _Taub._

Undershrub, silky-tomentose all over. Leaves appearing after flowering.
Peduncles elongate, 2-flowered. Flowers subsessile. Pod terete, silky.

Darfur Prov. (J. Kurku).


=V. membranacea= _A. Rich._

Herbaceous twiner, thinly grey-silky. Leaflets 3, membranous, ovate-
rhomboidal, up to 2½ in. long. Flowers 2-4 on slender flexuose
peduncles, 1-2 in. long; cor. pink. Pod linear straight, subterete, 2½
in. long.

Nubia.


=V. golungensis= _Baker._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves trifol., with stipels; flowers yellow, 2-4 on
6-9 in. long peduncle.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Renk).


=V. linearifolia= _Hutch._

Very slender twiner with wiry stems. Leaves trifoliolate; leaflets
subsessile, linear, acute, 3-4 in. long, ¼ in. broad, glabrous, with
numerous strongly reticulate lateral nerves on each side. Flowers
yellow. Pods spirally coiled when ripe, 2½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=V. vexillata= _Benth._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaflets 3, narrowly ovate-lanceolate, rounded at
base, apex cuspidate; flowers large, pink; keel beaked.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=V. sp.=

Herbaceous climber. Leaflets 3, linear-lanceolate, about 3 in. long;
corolla yellow, heavily streaked with purple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=V. caerulea= _Baker._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaflets 3, more or less hastate, sometimes darker
coloured at the base; corolla deep blue, in pairs on peduncles 4-6 in.
long. Pod linear, terete, 3 in. long, black when mature.

Mongalla Prov.


=V. reticulata= _Hook. f._

Silky-hairy herbaceous climber. Leaflets 3, papery, with raised
reticulate veins beneath, grey-hairy. Flowers reddish, 2-4 close
together on 2-4 in. long peduncles. Pod linear, straight, terete, nearly
3 in. long, bristly, black when ripe.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=V. nilotica= _Hook. f._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaflets 3, ovate-lanceolate; flowers yellow, about ¾
in. long, in close racemes on peduncles 3-5 in. long. Pod 2-3 in. long
and ¼ in. broad, slightly curved, pendulous.

White Nile Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Khor near Talodi); Bahr El Jebel
(Sudd).


=V. Kotschyi= _Schwfth._

Densely grey tomentose climber. Leaflets 3. Flowers reddish, 2-3
together on long or short peduncles from leafless branches.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumango).


=V. sinensis= _Endl._ =forma spontanea= _A. Brongn._ LUBIA HELLU—Arab.

Annual subglabrous twiner. Stipules ovate-lanceolate, subpeltate.
Leaflets 3, central roundish. Flowers yellow or reddish, in 6-12 fl.
racemes on peduncles up to 1 ft. long Pod pendulous, 6-12 in. long;
seeds red, white or black.

Nubia; cultivated on river banks and sagias.


=V. luteola= _Benth._

Prostrate, trailing herb. Leaflets 3, oval to obovate, narrow at base,
rounded at the apex; flowers yellow; pod 2-2½ in., broadly linear,
subcylindrical.

Nubia.


334 =Voandzeia subterranea= _Thouars._ ABU GAWI—Arab.

Herb. Leaves 3-foliolate; pod 1-seeded, ripens underground. Flowers 1-3
on flexuous peduncle which is at first only up to ½ in. long. Cor.
yellow, often abortive.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Boma Plateau.

Boiled and eaten for food, but not of high value.


335 =Psophocarpus palustris= _Desv._

Herbaceous climber with lilac-coloured flowers and short 4-winged pods.
Root tuberous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Mvolo); Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).


336 =Dolichos Lablab= _Linn._ LUBIA—AFIN—Arab.

Herbaceous twiner. Leaflets 3, broadly ovate-rhomboid; flowers usually
purple; style bent, much laterally flattened, strongly bearded. Pod
oblong up to 2 in. long and nearly 1 in. broad, 2-4 seeded.

Northern Sudan.

Cultivated largely as a fodder crop.


=D. Schweinfurthii= _Harms._

Leafless or nearly so at time of flowering; stems erect, simple, about 1
ft. high. Leaves trifoliolate, subsessile; leaflets oblanceolate with 3
parallel nerves about 5 in. long, glabrous. Flowers in clusters, ¾ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=D. pseudo-pachyrhizus= _Harms._ JEKORO—Golo.

Climber with a tuberous root which attains a length of 6-8 ft.; leaves
3-fol.; leaflets more or less lobed, 3-nerved at the base, up to 6 in.
long and broad; very glabrous. Pods velvety, 4 in. long.

White Nile & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.

Commonly cultivated in tropics, the tuberous roots being eaten as a
food, and a starch obtained therefrom. Both the tubers and the beans
contain a poisonous resin which is an active fish poison.

In the Bahr El Ghazal the tuber is mixed with the sap of the Heglig and
used as a substitute for soap.


=D. splendens= _Welw._

Undershrub, 4 ft. high, stems densely grey-silky. Leaflets 3, densely
grey-silky, tomentose beneath. Flowers in long lax, terminal racemes.
Cor. bright red, 1 in. deep. Pod over 2 in. long, linear, recurved, grey
downy, with ½ in. long style twisted at the base.

Mongalla Prov.


=D. uniflorus= _Lam._

Twining perennial. Leaflets 3, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, acute,
glabrous; corolla yellow; pod over 2 in. long, flattened, with a long
beak.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=D. biflorus= _Linn._

Erect, hairy herb, nearly allied to foregoing; flowers yellowish-white.
Pod linear, nearly straight, 1¼ in. long, tipped with the persistent
style.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (around Jur Ghattas).

An important food, fodder and green manure crop.


337 =Sphenostylis Schweinfurthii= _Harms._

Herb up to 6 ft. high. Leaflets 3, linear-lanceolate, emarginate,
mucronate, 3½ in. long, ½ in. broad, glabrous, reticulate. Racemes head-
like, axillary, few-flowered. Flowers yellow. Pod linear, pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=S. stenocarpus= _Harms._

Herbaceous climber with 3-fol. leaves and red flowers, 1 in. long in
3-12 flowered racemes. Pod 4-5 in. long, hard, straight, sutures much
thickened.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


338 =Adenodolichos macrothyrsus= _Harms._

Leaves opposite, trifoliolate; leaflets ovate-rhomboid subacute, rounded
at the base, 4-6 in. long, 2½-3 in. broad, gland-dotted below. Flowers
in loose panicles. Pods 2 cm. long, acuminate, crispate-pubescent; seeds
black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Gir).


339 =Cajanus indicus= _Spreng._ ADS SUDANI—Arab. The “Dal” plant.

Erect shrubby plant, up to 8 ft. high. Leaves 3-fol., gland-dotted;
flowers yellow or purple, in 2-8 flowered axillary racemes. Pod 2-3 in.
long, ab. ½ in. broad, pubescent.

Northern Sudan; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Bongo-land).

Cultivated for its pulse, which is highly nutritious.


340 =Rhynchosia cyanosperma= _Benth._

Woody climber, rusty-pubescent when young. Leaflets 3, coriaceous,
central roundish, 4-5 in. long. Racemes lax, 6-9 in. long, on woody
peduncles. Cor. brick red or white. Pod equalling the calyx, oblong,
grey-velvety.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the
Assika).


=R. flavissima= _Hochst._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves trifol., glabrous, gland-dotted, as in all
this genus; flowers yellow, in lax 6-12 fl. racemes, 2-4 in. long on
spreading peduncles. Pod ¾ in. long, narrowed to the base, glabrous.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Blue Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.
(Meshra El Zeraf).


=R. minima= _DC._ EL TURBA (Hillet Abbas)—Arab.

Slender herbaceous twiner. Leaves small, 3-fol.; leaflets rhomboid to
oval, obtuse, apiculate, black-dotted; flowers small, yellow; pods
2-seeded, slightly turgid.

Red Sea Prov. (Port Sudan); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.
(Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (El Dueim & Hillet Abbas);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai); Mongalla Prov.


=R. caribæa= _DC._

Herbaceous, grey pubescent twiner. Leaflets 3, central one broad ovate
or subrhomboidal. Racemes lax, 2-6 in. long on short peduncles; cor.
yellow. Pod ¾ in. long, under ½ in. broad, thinly grey silky when young,
turgid.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land); Bahr El Jebel (Lat.
7° 37′ N.).


=R. viscosa= _DC._

Semi-woody twiner. Leaves 3-fol., leaflets over 2 in. long, almost
sessile, broadly ovate, subcordate or truncate at base, acute. Flowers
yellow often heavily streaked with deep purple; pods 2 seeded; seeds
with small aril.

Nubia; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Derago);
Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=R.= (probably form of) =viscosa= _DC._

Leaflets somewhat 3-lobed; flowers yellow, lightly striped with purple;
pods viscous.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River: Nasser).


=R. Memnonia= _DC._ RA’AFA or LUWEIS (N. Kordn.); WADĀN EL FĀR, BĀL &
FARAH EL GUMRI (Khartoum)—Arab.

Grey-silky herbaceous climber. Leaflets 3, central nearly round, up to 1
in. across. Racemes 2-6 in. long, lax 6-20 flowered on short peduncles;
cor. yellow. Pod ¾ in. pubescent.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile
Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (South, Abu Gerad); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near
Nuer villages).


=R. glutinosa= _Harms._

Stems branched from the base, about 2 ft. high, pubescent. Leaflets 3,
broadly ovate, rounded at base, apex subacute, 1 in. long and broad,
glandular and shortly pubescent below. Racemes few-flowered, 2 in. long;
standard very striate. Pod 1 in. long, slightly pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Derago).


=R. Schweinfurthii= _Harms._

Twiner. Leaves long-petiolate, trifoliolate; leaflets obovate-orbicular,
shortly cuneate at the base, 1½ in. long and broad, rather densely
covered with golden glands below but not pubescent. Racemes nearly
sessile, axillary, few and dense-flowered; sepals very acuminate, ½ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=R. teramnoides= _Harms._

Slender twiner. Leaves shortly petiolate, trifoliolate; leaflets
lanceolate, acute 1-2 in. long, very minutely pubescent below, strongly
reticulate. Flowers densely clustered in the leaf axils. Calyx silky
pubescent. Pod curved, ¾ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Bongo-land: Sabbi).


=R. resinosa= _Hochst._

Somewhat woody glandular and pubescent twiner. Leaflets 3, ovate-
rhomboidal, 2-3 in. long and broad. Racemes 2-3 in. long on woody
peduncles; cor. yellow. Pod ½ in. long enclosed in calyx.

Nubia.


=R. ferruginea= _A. Rich._ SINGĪD (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Herbaceous densely rusty-pubescent twiner. Leaflets 3, central broad
ovate, 1½ in. long, mucronate. Racemes lax, exceeding the leaves; cor.
yellow, veined with purple.

Fung Prov. (Harun); Kordofan Prov.


341 =Eriosema pulcherrimum= _Baker f._

Stem erect, herbaceous, 1 ft. high, covered with soft white hairs.
Leaves simple, ovate, subcordate, 4-7 in. long, 2½-4 in. broad, silky
hairy. Flowers in dense terminal racemes 2-4 in. long. Calyx villous.
Pod villous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=E. holophyllum= _Baker fil._

Stem erect, rather woody, 1½ ft. high, pubescent. Leaves simple, ovate-
lanceolate, rounded or cuneate at the base, 3½-6 in. long, finely
pubescent. Flowers in subglobose terminal and axillary racemes. Pod
oblong, villous, ⅔ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumba).


=E. cajanoides= _Hook. fil._

Erect, branching shrub, up to 5 ft. high. Leaflets 3, central
oblanceolate, 2-3 in. long, gland-dotted, as generally in this genus,
fine grey pubescent beneath. Racemes 2-4 in. long on firm peduncles 1-2
in. long; cor. yellow. Pod over ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Bongo-land: by the Dogguru River,
Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=E. macrostipulum= _Baker pl._

Stem herbaceous, up to 2 ft. high, pubescent. Leaflets 3, ovate, acute,
base rounded, 2½-3½ in. long, 1¼-1¾ in. broad, softly pubescent.
Stipules ¾ in. long. Flowers crowded in racemes up to 1½ in. long. Pod
oblong, ½ in. long, villous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=E. sparsiflorum= _Baker fil._

Stem virgate, rather woody. Leaflets 3, narrowly oblong, 2-2½ in. long,
acute, pubescent. Flowers in lax axillary racemes. Pod flat, 1½ in.
long, pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River).


=E. oblongum= _Benth.?_

Stems branched, about 8 in. long, from a woody rhizome, densely hirsute.
Leaflets 3, elliptic, rounded at the apex, 1¼ in. long, softly villous
below, nervose. Racemes head-like, long-pedunculate, few-flowered. Pods
1 in. long, densely villous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Penyo).


=E. linifolium= _Baker fil._

Stem erect, rather woody. Leaflets 3-5, very long, up to 7 in., narrowly
lanceolate, acuminate, whitish pubescent below. Stipules nearly ½ in.
long. Racemes terminal, lax, 2-6 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, & Niamniam-land, Bendo).


=E. Schweinfurthii= _Baker fil._

Stem erect, herbaceous, 3-4 in. high, from a tuberous root. Leaves
simple, subsessile, narrowly lanceolate, 4-6 in. long, up to ½ in.
broad, grey canescent below. Stipules lanceolate, ½ in. long. Flowers
closely racemose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=E. flemingioides= _Baker._

Shrub, densely yellowish-grey or rusty downy. Leaflets 3, central oblong
4-5 in. long, lower surface permanently grey downy. Racemes short
stalked, fairly dense, 2-3 in. long; bracts scarious, in unexpanded
heads concealing the flowers; cor. pale to deep red Pod ab. ¾ in. long,
tawny.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Duggu); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


342 =Dalbergia Melanoxylon= _Guill._ & _Perr._ BABANUS or EIBNUSA—Arab;
ORŪM (Dilling) & KUNG (J. Eliri)—Nuba; FAITI & FUNITI—Bari; ERRIT (Goz
El Siada), RED (Kenissa), RĒT (L. Powendael) and RĪT (Bahr El
Ghazal)—Dinka; RIT—Jur; BOKANGO or EBANOS—Golo; TARI—Hameg; LURR &
GEL—Nuer; GIUOM—Burun.

Small to middle-sized tree of irregular growth; branches spiny. Leaves
imparipinnate; leaflets 9-13, alternate; flowers white, sweet-scented;
pods flat, indehiscent, mostly 1-seeded.

White Nile Prov. (Jebelein) & south of Lat. 13° N.

The timber is black like ebony, for which it is used as a substitute;
good-sized and sound logs are, however, rare. It is difficult to work
but takes a beautiful polish. It is resistant to insect pests, and is
useful for cabinet making.


=D. sp.= (leaf only) =No. 1295= _S.G.H._

Tall, graceful tree. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets alternate.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (near Dilling).


=D. sp.= HURHAR—Arab (Pod only).

Tree.

Kordofan Prov. (Muriel L/160).


343 =Pterocarpus lucens= _Guill._ & _Perr._ TARAYA—Arab; DIGDIG—Dinka &
Jur; M’BOLO & GANA—Golo; IMMIRORA—Hameg; TIRMA—Bongo.

Tall and straight tree. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 3-7, alternate;
flowers yellow, sweet-scented; pod indehiscent, disk-like, with a winged
margin.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

The wood, which is yellowish white in colour and strong, works well. It
is suited to carpentry, joinery and cabinet making. The bark, which
contains a gum allied to “Kino,” is astringent, and is used for tanning
and for dysentery. The leaves excite the appetite, and are a remedy for
stomach troubles.


344 =Lonchocarpus laxiflorus= _Guill._ & _Perr._ AMGINEIDILAD (Baggara)
& KHASHKHASH AZRAK (Fung), K. EL SUGHUR & HARHAR (Baggara)—Arab;
LAKUDI—Bari; ZIDI—Zande.

Small tree. Leaves imparipinnate; leaflets 5-7, oblong-lanceolate to
ovate-oblong; flowers light-purple, monadelphous, in dense panicles. Pod
3-4 in. long, nearly ¾ in. broad, membranous, straight.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile Prov. (Jebelein); Nuba Mts. Prov.;
Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Darfur & Mongalla Provinces.

Wood, heavy, yellow. A very showy tree when in flower.


345 =Andira inermis= _H.B._ & _K._

Tree 20-30 ft. high. Leaflets 9-13, lanceolate, terminal obovate 2-3 in.
long, subcoriaceous, glabrous. Flowers pink in pyramidal panicles up to
1 ft. long. Fruit plum-like, hard, 1½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


346 =Afrormosia laxiflora= _Harms._ M’BANGA—Golo; M’BANGA & LEBBE—Bongo.

Middle-sized tree with imparipinnate leaves and inconspicuous greenish
flowers, due to white petals falling off early. Leaflets 9-11, glabrous,
coriaceous. Pods flat, thin, 4 in. long, with an intra-marginal nerve.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau, Jur).

The wood is dark and hard, and close grained: density 1.1 (sap-wood and
1.14 heart-wood). It is difficult to work, but takes a good polish. An
excellent wood for cabinet making.


347 =Swartzia madagascariensis= _Desv._

Tree, 20-30 ft. high. Leaflets 9-11, alternate, oblong, coriaceous, 2-3
in. long. Flowers solitary or in few-flowered racemes; petal 1 only
orbicular, silky on back. Pod up to 1 ft. long, up to ¾ in. thick,
cylindrical, slightly furrowed.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

Wood very hard and heavy, density 1.08; difficult to work, and suited
for piles and fences. The heart-wood is dark reddish brown, the sap-wood
yellow. It takes a fine polish and makes handsome furniture, etc.


348 =Cordyla africana= _Lour._ DONJIJUAK (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka; BOLI,
CHINYA & TINA—Golo.

Large tree with rough bark. Leaves gland-dotted, imparipinnate; leaflets
19-25 up to 2 in. long. Flowers in 6-12 flowered racemes, 1-2 in. long;
petals 0; stamens numerous; filaments free or very slightly connate. Pod
stalked at first, then yellow, pulpy, the size of a small lemon.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).

Yields a dark gum. The fruit is eaten.


                              =SALICACEÆ.=


349 =Salix Safsaf= _Forsk._ SAFSAF—Arab; URU—Hameg. Willow.

Large riverside shrub. Leaves alt., lanceolate, usually 2-3 in. long,
glabrous, sometimes villous when young. Infl. diœcious; catkins 1-2 in.
long. Capsule rather broad and blunt; seeds silky hairy.

Atbara River; Nile below Khartoum; Blue Nile and tributaries; Darfur
Prov. (J. Marra).

The twigs are used for basket making. A black dye obtained from the
leaves, is used for dyeing mats.


=S. Murielii= _Skan._ SAFSAF—Arab; URŪ—Hameg.

Riverside shrub. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, 1½-3 in. long, densely grey-
silky hairy. Catkins 1-3 in. long. Capsule broadly ovoid without style.

Nubia (between Berber & Khartoum); Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar & Dinder).


=S. Schweinfurthii= _Skan._

Young branches grey-tomentose, finally brown and glabrous. Leaves
oblong-lanceolate, long acuminate, serrulate, up to 5 in. long. Catkins
1-2½ in. long. Capsule ovoid, beaked, nearly ¼ in. long.

Nubia; Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan Prov.


                               =MORACEÆ.=


350 =Chlorophora excelsa= _Benth._ & _Hook._ DORO—Kaliko.

Tall tree with milky juice, with bole clean up to 60 ft. Leaves alt.,
elliptic, acuminate, cordate, serrate-dentate, 6-7 in. long (shorter on
old trees), tomentose, especially when young; pet. ½-1½ in. long. Infl.
diœcious. Male fl. on catkin-like spikes up to 7 in. long; calyx
4-partite; sta. 4. Fem. fl. in globose or cylindrical spikes up to 2½
in. long; calyx segm. 4; ovary enclosed in calyx; style simple or
unequally bifid. Fruit a fleshy syncarp.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Assika River).

Wood brownish yellow with lighter longitudinal lines, hard, but works
well. A beautiful wood suitable for cabinet work.


351 =Dorstenia bicornis= _Schwfth._

Herb, 1 ft. high, from a creeping rhizome, pubescent on petioles, which
are long for lower leaves. Leaves thin, elliptic to obovate or
obcuneate, apex mucronulate, acute to acuminate, undulate to coarse-
dentate, 4-5 in. long. Infl. monœcious solitary; fl. crowded on a
foliform, lunately curved, stalked receptacle, ab. 1 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Tuhami’s Zariba).


=D. psilurus= _Welw._

Herb, 1-2½ ft. high, from a creeping rhizome. Leaves polymorphic,
varying from ovate-elliptic to 3- or several-lobed. Infl. solitary,
long-stalked vertical; receptacle linear-lanceolate up to 1½ in. long
passing above into an erect, linear appendage 2½-3½ in. long, slightly
dilated at apex; base prolonged beyond the stalk forming an upward
curving appendage, ½ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=D. Walleri= _Hemsl._

Fleshy plant; stem simple from a disciform tuber, 8-16 in. high. Leaves
crowded at top of stem, elliptic with unequal base, 2½-5½ in. long.
Infl. solitary; stalk 1-2 in. long; receptacle stellate, 4-7 rayed, up
to 1 in. diam.; rays ¾-3 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


=D. barnimiana= _Schwfth._

Stemless, tuberous herb. Leaves radical fleshy cordate to cordate-ovate,
the ultimate leaf sometimes 3-sect, segments again 2-3 sect, many-
toothed; pet. 6 in. long or more. Peduncles as long as petioles;
receptacle green, vertical, linear to oblong, with a narrow margin and
linear bracts, the terminal one the longest up to 1¼ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat; Khor Koki, near Matamma); Fung Prov. (J.
Fazoghl, Famaka, Fazoghli).

=var. tropæolifolia= _Rendle._

Smaller than above. Leaf solitary, peltate, roundish, 1 in. diam.; pet.
under 2 in. long. Peduncle 2-4 in. long, bracts on receptacle ⅓-½ in.
long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat; left bank of Gendua River).


=D. foetida var. obovata= _Engl._

Stems from a thick fleshy tuber; leaves on long slender petioles,
elliptic, ovate or obovate, 1½ in. long, 1 in. broad. Infl. roundish,
with 8-10 linear unequal arms about ⅙ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Katai Geraita).


=D. palmata= _Engl._

Stemless herb, tuber roundish to broadly conical. Petioles 2-4 in. long;
leaves glabrous, ovate-cordate, dentate or 3-7 sect, 3-4 in. long.
Peduncle 2-4 in. long; erect, narrowly triangular, up to 1½ in. long;
apical bract ¾ in. and 1-2 pairs of bracts from basal angles, ab. ½ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur; Wau, Jur Ghattas & Mangob).


352 =Ficus palmata= _Forsk._

Shrub or small tree with milky juice. Leaves alt. ovate-acuminate or
ovate-orbicular and 3-5 lobed, scabrous, 2½-8 in. long. Receptacles
axillary with 3 basal bracts and numerous others round the opening into
the receptacle (ostiole).

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra; Abwo stream, 8,200
ft.).


=F. Sycomorus= _Linn._ GAMEIZ—Arab; FANTEIB—Hadendowa; N’GUHIN
(Dilling), N’GWANI (J. Ghulfan), DULLAM (Tagele) & INDYEIK
(Kadugli)—Nuba; NENSHA—Hameg; KELISHO—Bari; NAGAP (Kaka)—Dinka; NAP
NGOF—Nuer; AWOLAM—Shilluk.

Very large tree. Leaves alt., suborbicular, 2-5 in. long, subentire,
sometimes somewhat scabrous, 3-nerved at base. Receptacles (Figs) 1 in.
diam., tomentose, in leafless panicles on older wood; basal bracts 2,
ostiolar bracts numerous.

Found near running water, in most parts of the Sudan, Nubia; Red Sea
Prov. (Suakin, Erkowit); Berber Prov. (Shendi & El Mesherif); Khartoum
Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Jebel.

Wood soft, not durable, used for dug-out canoes and household utensils.
Fruit edible. The wood was used by ancient Egyptians for mummy cases.


=F. capensis= _Thunb._ N’GAB (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka; GASSE—Golo.

Shrub of small tree. Leaves oval, 3-nerved at base, 2½-9 in. long; pet.
up to 3 in. long; stip. oblong-lanceolate, villous, caducous.
Receptacles in leafless 1 ft. long panicles on old wood, each obovoid,
up to 1 in. long; basal bracts 3; bracts round prominent ostiole
numerous, hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Jur Ghattas).

Fruit edible.


=F. Vallis-Choudæ= _Del._

Large tree. Leaves broadly ovate, 4-8 in. long, coarsely dentate; pet.
1-2½ in. long; stip. linear-lanceolate, ¾ in. long, deciduous.
Receptacles 1¾ in. diam., axillary, solitary, pear-shaped; basal bracts
small and caducous; ostiolar bracts numerous coriaceous.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Gendua River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-
land); Nabambisso River); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Wando River).


=F. gnaphalocarpa= _A. Rich._

Large tree. Leaves orbicular or ovate, cordate, 2-5 in. long,
coriaceous, scabrous at times, obtusely serrate; pet. ¼-3 in. long;
stip. subpersistent, lanceolate-acuminate. Receptacles axillary,
solitary, tomentose, 1½ in. long; basal bracts 3 whorled or scattered
over the receptacle; ostiolar bracts tomentose, ¼ in. long, horizontal
across orifice and retrorse inside it.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur; Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=F. capreæfolia= _Del._ GUEIR or SEYID—Arab; OBA—Hameg.

Riverside shrub. Leaves nearly all opposite, 3-dentate at apex, 1-4 in.
long, scabrous; pet. ab. ¼ in. long; stipules paired, lanceolate, ¼ in.
long. Receptacles axillary, solitary, ¾ in. diam., bracts 3-4, scattered
on ½ in. long peduncle; ostiole open, bracts imbricate descending into
the orifice.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: banks of the Atbara River near Matamma);
between Matamma & Shendi; Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Blue
Nile Prov. (Wad El Ghazal, Abu Haraz); Kordofan Prov. (Bara); Upper
White Nile Prov. (Fashoda); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: River
Ibba & River Sway, near Dukuttu, Mittu-land: Roah River).

Fruit edible.


=F. urceolaris= _Welw._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves alt., unequally elliptic, caudate, 4-9 in.
long, coarsely dentate; pet. ⅓-¾ in. long; stip. ovate, scabrous, ¼ in.
long. Receptacles axillary 1-3 together on young shoots; basal bracts
minute, scattered on peduncle. Ostiole large, bracts imbricate,
mucilaginous, hyaline.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: on the Nabambisso River).


=F. storthophylla= _Warb._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves obovate-oblanceolate, caudate, 3-6 in. long,
pinnately and laciniately lobed, scabrous; pet. ¼-½ in. long; stip.
deciduous. Receptacles axillary 4 or 2 together, ¼ in. diam., subsessile
with 2-3 basal bracts; ostiole large and slightly protruding, bracts
numerous in and around the orifice.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Atoboru River).


=F. sciarophylla= _Warb._

Shrub 8 ft. high. Leaves elliptic, coarsely lobulate, acuminate, 6-12
in. long, whitish villous when young; pet. 1-2 in. long or more; stip.
oblong-lanceolate, acuminate, ab. 1 in. long, glabrous. Receptacle not
known.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: River Hoo).


=F. salicifolia= _Vahl._ UMSISI (Baggara)—Arab; TINGALIGALI
(Kadugli)—Nuba.

Moderate-sized tree; bark light-brown. Leaves lanceolate, veins
reticulate, strongly marked, usually 1-6 in. long; pet. ½-2½ in. long;
stip. linear, 1 in. long, deciduous. Receptacles axillary crowded in
pairs on short peduncles; basal bracts minute, deciduous; ostiole closed
by bracts.

Blue Nile Prov. (Segeddi); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Kadugli, J. Daier);
Darfur Prov.


=F. ingens= _Miq._

Tree or shrub. Leaves ovate, cordate, 3-6 in. long, shining; pet. 1 in.
long; stip. not known. Receptacles ⅓ in. diam., axillary, paired; basal
bracts 2, coriaceous; ostiole closed by 3 imbricate bracts.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Gendua River); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Nuba Mts.
Prov. (Talodi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dukuttu and Jur Ghattas); Bahr El
Jebel (Madi).


=F. ingentoides= _Hutchinson._

Shrub or small tree, branchlets tomentose. Leaves oblong-lanceolate,
rounded or subcordate at base, shortly acuminate, 2½-5 in. long, entire,
thinly coriaceous; pet. ab. 1 in. long; stip. caducous, coriaceous.
Receptacles axillary on old wood, ½ in. diam., basal bracts persistent;
ostiolar bracts imbricate, visible outside.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, Mid Robo 8,300 ft.).


=F. polita= _Vahl._

Tree 50 ft. high. Leaves ovate, caudate, 3-6 in. long, rounded or
subcordate at base; pet. up to 4½ in. long; stip. lanceolate-acuminate,
caducous. Receptacles clustered on outgrowths on old wood, 1½ in. diam.,
wrinkled; basal bracts 3, triangular, ostiolar bracts retrorse inside
orifice.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Linduku River, Mittu: Mvolo).


=F. ovata= _Vahl._

Large tree with a wide crown. Leaves oblong-elliptic, shortly acuminate,
7-10 in. long, base rounded or cordate; pet. ab. 2 in. long; stip.
lanceolate-acuminate, caducous, 2 in. long. Receptacles in axillary
pairs, 1-2 in. diam., enclosed when young by lid-like basal bracts;
ostioles small; bracts all internal.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Linduku River & Mansilli River);
Belgian Congo.


=F. glumosa= _Del._ TILT—Hadendowa; KWEYI (J. Eliri) & RREK (Kadugli) &
FATAA (J. Daier)—Nuba; LAG—Dinka; GARI—Jur; KELA—Golo.

Small to large tree. Leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate, subcordate, up
to 6 in. long, subcoriaceous; pet. up to 2½ in. long; stip. caducous.
Receptacles axillary, paired, ¼ in. diam., basal bracts small; ostiole
small, prominent; bracts internal.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Erkowit); Fung
Prov. (J. Juli, Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J.
Daier, Kadugli & J. Ghulfan); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo & Dar Fertit).

The bark is used for tanning and the latex for making bird-lime. The
fruit is eaten.

=var. glaberrima= _Martelli._ SĒMOK—Hadendowa.

More glabrous than above.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); White
Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli); Darfur Prov.; Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Wau).

In the Bahr El Ghazal Prov. the bark is used for tanning and also for
making native cloth.


=F. Thonningii= _Blume._

Tree 40 ft. high. Leaves obovate- or oblong-elliptic, 2-9 in. long,
chartaceous; pet. ½-2½ in. long; stip. deciduous, lanceolate-acuminate,
½ in. long. Recept. axillary, paired, sessile, ¼ in. diam.; basal bracts
3, ovate; ostiole small, boss-like, bracts all internal.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River); Belgian Congo
(Niamniam-land: Wando River).


=F. populifolia= _Vahl._ SHEIALA (Dilling)—Nuba.

Moderate-sized tree, with smooth yellowish bark. Leaves rotundate,
cordate, acuminate, 2½-5 in. long; pet. 1½-3½ in. long; stip. caducous,
linear-lanceolate, acuminate, ab. 1 in. long. Recept. axillary, 2-4
together, ⅓ in. diam.; basal bracts 2, minute; ostiolar bracts all
included.

Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar); Fung Prov. (Roseires); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol & Jebelein); Nuba Mts. Prov. (rocky hills); Darfur Prov.

Fruit edible.


=F. mittuensis= _Warb._

Differs from following by the prominent umbilical ostiole and the
bifurcate midrib of the leaves.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu: Mvolo).


=F. abutilifolia= _Miq._

Tree with light-red bark. Leaves broad-cordate, 3-8 in. long and broad;
pet. 2-4 in. long, flattened horizontally; stip. caducous. Recept.
axillary, in pairs, stipitate, ½ in. long, mottled; basal bracts, rim or
cup-like; ostiolar bracts all included.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=F. vasta= _Forsk._

Large tree. Leaves broadly ovate, deeply cordate, 3-14 in. long,
tomentose; petiole up to 5 in. long; stip. deciduous, 1-3 in. long.
Recept. axillary 2-3 together, ½ in. diam., basal bracts connate at
base, soon breaking from it; ostiole 2-lipped; bracts all included, 2
larger than the others.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber, Khor Harassa); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat:
Khor River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Makporru Hill).


=F. congensis= _Engl._ KANGARU (J. Eliri)—Nuba; ADOT or ADIT—Jur.

Large tree. Leaves ovate-cordate, 5-8 in. long, coriaceous; pet. 1-3 in.
long; stip. lanceolate-acuminate, 1-2½ in. long. Receptacles axillary,
in pairs, ⅓ in. diam.; basal bracts 2, connate at base; ostiole
2-lipped; bracts included.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol & Jebelein); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Deim Guju, Jur: between Tonj & Wau,
Bongo: Gir).


=F. discifera= _Warb._ KAURDAK (J. Daier)—Nuba.

Tree; leaf scars on branchlets disk- or horseshoe-shaped, ¼ in. diam.
Leaves very broadly ovate, shortly acuminate, cordate, 4-8 in. long,
2-3½ in. wide; stip. caducous, lanceolate-acuminate, ⅓ in. long. Recept.
probably axillary near ends of shoots ab. ½ in. diam.; basal bracts
connate-saucer-shaped; ostiolar bracts included, 2 larger.

Nubia; between Gedaref & Abu Haraz (J. Arrang); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J.
Daier).


=F. platyphylla= _Del._ KURUWANG (J. Eliri), TAL (J. Ghulfan)—Nuba;
KUBO—Bongo; KWEL (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka; KUVU, FUNGU or WUNGO—Golo;
KWAYA or PAYO—Jur; KOYO—Krej; ROKKO—Zande.

Very large tree. Leaves broadly elliptic, deep-cordate, 5-10 in. long;
pet. 3-5 in. long; stip. deciduous, triangular, ⅓ in. long. Recept.
axillary, 2-3 together, ab. ½ in. diam.; basal bracts 2, connate at
base; ostiolar bracts all included.

Dongola Prov. (Merowe); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli, Singa & Jongol’s Post);
Upper White Nile Prov. (Khor Attar); Sobat River; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Dinka, Jur: Jur Ghattas, Mittu); Bahr El Jebel.

The latex yields a very resinous rubber of no commercial value. The
Dinkas tap the tree and with the dried latex clean their brass
ornaments. The bark is used for tanning and for making bark cloth and
ropes.


=F. iteophylla= _Miq._

Epiphyte or tree. Leaves oblanceolate, narrowing at each end, 1½-4 in.
long; pet. 1-2 in. long; stip. deciduous lanceolate, small. Recept.
axillary, crowded on young shoots, ab. ½ in. diam.; basal bracts 2,
caducous, leaving a saucer-like rim; ostiole 2-lipped; bracts included.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Homra near Kadugli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).


=F. Dekdekena= _A. Rich._ UMSISI (Kordn.) & SARDOL (Sennar)—Arab; NIHING
(Dilling) & RREK (Kadugli)—Nuba; ARAKH & THARAT—Hameg.

Tree or epiphyte. Leaves oblanceolate, short-acuminate, undulate, 2-6
in. long; pet. up to 2½ in. long; stip. ovate-lanceolate, ¼ in. long,
ciliate. Recept. axillary in pairs crowded on young shoots, ⅓ in. diam.;
basal bracts 3, connate at base; ostiole 2-lipped; bracts included, 2
larger than rest.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli, Roseires); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Khor Ganna, near
Dilling); Blue Nile Prov. (Sheikh Talha); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).


=F. Carica= _Linn._ SHAGAR EL TIN—Arab. The Cultivated Fig.

It is said to yield a rubber.

Cultivated for its fruit.


353 =Antiaris sp.=

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Wau & Niamniam-land: Mt. Baginze).


354 =Treculia africana= _Decne._

Tall tree with milky juice and clear bole ⅔ its height. Leaves alt.,
elliptic, 3-8 in. long, coriaceous; pet. ¼-½ in. long; stip. caducous,
lanceolate, ½-¾ in. long. Fl. diœcious, capitate in both sexes, arranged
on outside of and densely surrounded by the bracts of the fleshy
receptacle. Male heads axillary short stalked, globose 1-2 in. diam.
Fruit a syncarp up to twice as large as a man’s head, yellowish outside
when ripe.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: near Kulenjo); Belgian Congo
(Niamniam-land: near Assika & Yuru Rivers).

The seeds are extracted from the fruit, ground into a paste and cooked
by frying in oil. The fruits are of great size, weighing from 13-18 lbs.
It has been estimated that a fruit may contain 1,500 seeds, each about
the size of a haricot bean.


                              =URTICACEÆ.=


355 =Fleurya æstuans= _Gaud._

Bright green, nettle-like monœcious herb, up to 4 or 6 ft. high. Leaves
alt., ovate, dentate 2-6 in. long, base truncate or slightly cordate,
3-nerved, with appressed stiff hairs on both surfaces; pet. 1-10 in.
long; stip, persistent, subulate, ab. ⅓ in. long. Infl. an axillary
long-stalked panicle, longer than the leaf, the small clusters bisexual
and male on the same panicle, rarely male on separate peduncles. Male
fl. calyx 4-5 partite; sta. 4-5; fem. fl. per. 4-partite, 2 segments
larger.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gir); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


356 =Urera sp.= HINNAT EL ABELAIN (Sennar)—Arab.

Shrub, 6-8 ft. high, somewhat like a tall nettle in appearance.

Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar); Fung Prov. (Saoleil For., under shade).

The branches having large pith cavities are cut and used as rosaries on
the West Coast.


357 =Bœhmeria platyphylla= _D. Don._

Shrub, 3-15 ft. high. Leaves mostly opp., broadly ovate, acuminate,
cordate, coarsely toothed, 3-9 in. long, sparsely white-hispid above;
pet. ½-6 in. long. Spikes axillary, longer than leaves, either simple
with male and fem. fl., or branched with male fl. on some branches and
both sexes on others.

Bahr El Ghazal (Niamniam-land).

=var. ugandensis= _Rendle._

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Assika River).


358 =Parietaria debilis= _Forst._

Small, almost translucent herb. Leaves subrotund, ⅓-1½ in. long, base
3-nerved; pet. shorter than blade. Fl. in sessile pairs of cymules in
leaf-axils, polygamous, minute.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 9,700 ft.).


359 =Pouzolzia mixta= _Solms._

Monœcious shrub, young branches white-hairy. Leaves alt., ovate,
acuminate, ab. 1 in. long, densely hairy above, white-tomentose beneath;
pet. under ¼ in. Fl. monœcious clustered in leaf-axils, fem. fl.
solitary among the numerous males.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


360 =Forskohlea tenacissima= _Linn._ LUSSAQ or NUSSAQ—Arab.

Herb, up to 2 ft., woody below, branches with spiny, hooked hairs.
Leaves alt. obovate or rhomboid, crenate-serrate, ½-2 in. long, 3-nerved
at base, hispid above and white-tomentose below; pet. ½ length of blade.
Fl. monœcious embedded in wool within a campanulate involucre.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L., Sallom); Khartoum Prov. (J. Royan and other
rocky hills).

The bark yields a strong fibre.


=F. viridis= _Ehrenb._

Not unlike above. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, acuminate, bluntly toothed,
½-4 in. long, only very sparsely hairy.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L., Khor Tamanib); Khartoum Prov.


                            =CANNABINACEÆ.=


361 =Cannabis sativa= _Linn._ HASHISH, KAMANGA & BANGO—Arab.

The common hemp.

Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov.

The cultivation of the hemp plant is forbidden in the Sudan. Such
specimens as have been found cultivated surreptitiously in clearings in
the forest have been devoid of the resinous excretion characteristic of
the official drug.


                             =CELASTRACEÆ.=


362 =Gymnosporia senegalensis= _Lam._ YO’OI or YOI—Arab;
GIRGETTI—Rashida; DABALAB—Hadendowa; MEIRTEN (Dilling)—Nuba;
SURREH—Bari; AKUWAT (L. Powendael)—Dinka; KWOICH—Nuer; GUMBOTO—Golo.

Spiny or (var. inermis) unarmed shrub. Leaves variable, from obovate to
linear spathulate, coriaceous, entire or crenate. Flowers in axillary
dichotomous cymes, small, greenish-white. Capsule size of a small pea,
usually 2, sometimes 3-valved.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has); Blue Nile Prov. (near Kamlin); Fung
Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Mid zone to 8,000 ft.).

=var. obovata= _Loes._

Blue Nile, White Nile, & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.

=var. inermis= _A. Rich._

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr
El Ghazal Prov.

=var. spinosa= _Loes._

Kassala Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Wad Shellai).

The wood is close grained, hard and durable, it is often employed for
angareb legs. The ashes are used as a substitute for salt in the Bahr El
Ghazal, and the root bark for dysentery.


=G. cf. G. senegalensis= _Lam._

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Mt. Baginse).


=G. sp.= HAMASHINDI—Hadendowa.

Shrub with coarse, coriaceous leaves.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


363 =Elæodendron æthiopicum= _Oliv._ =var. Burkeanum= _Loes._

Small tree. Leaves rather coriaceous, elliptic-oblong, shining above.
Flowers greenish-yellow in axillary pedunculate cymes or umbels. Ovary
deeply immersed in broad angular disk, 2-3 celled. Fruit an ovoid,
apiculate drupe.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


                           =HIPPOCRATEACEÆ.=


364 =Hippocratea cymosa= _De Wild_ & _Dur._ =var. Schweinfurthiana=
_Loes._

Climber. Leaves opposite, oblong-elliptic, crenulate, 2-2¾ in. long,
leathery, reticulate. Flowers densely cymose. Fruits oblong-
oblanceolate, about 1½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Zeriba Abu Gurun & Bongo-land: Biselli).


=H. obtusifolia= _Roxb._ LEVII (J. Eliri)—Nuba; M’KOMVE—Golo.

Woody climber. Leaves opposite, variable in shape and size, more or less
crenate. Flowers in cymes, often forming terminal panicles, small,
bisexual. Fruit 2 in. long, separating into 3 distinct flat coriaceous
carpels; seeds 4, compressed, winged.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (by water courses); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-Ghattas).


365 =Salacia Ducis-Wurtembergiæ= _Hochst._

Shrub; branches with ashen bark. Leaves obovate, obtusely serrate, much
reticulated. Panicles axillary, dichotomous; flowers small. Fruit
baccate, 1-3 celled.

Nubia; Blue Nile Prov.


=S. sp.=

Leaves subopposite, oblong-elliptic, obtusely acuminate, about 6 in.
long, 2 in. broad, thin, crenate; flowers not seen.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: River Ibba near Nganye).


                            =SALVADORACEÆ.=


366 =Dobera Roxburghii= _Planch._ MEIK—Hadendowa; MEIKAH—Arab.

Large, much branched tree, finely pubescent above. Leaves opp., simple,
coriaceous, ovate or variable in shape, 2-3 in. long, thinly white-
pubescent beneath. Fl. small, polygamous, in axillary panicles shorter
than leaves; calyx 3-5 lobed; petals 4-5 free, st. 4-5, filaments
monadelphous, ovary 1-celled.

Red Sea Prov. (Khors Ashat & Gateb); Dongola Prov. (Wadi El Merakh);
Kordofan Prov.

The flowers and leaves are used to perfume water.


367 =Salvadora persica= _Linn._ EL RAK, ARAKA & SHAU—Arab; KURREH &
LUFARI—Bari; ASHWEL or KWUIL (Mongalla Prov.); ASHWAL (Renk),
AGOWYAK-WYAK (Kaka) & AKIUL (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka; PAU & KWIL—Nuer;
OBAILOH—Shilluk. The Mustard tree.

Diffuse shrub or small tree, glabrous. Leaves opp. entire, coriaceous,
oblong, 2-3 in. long. Fl. very small, greenish-white in panicles from
ends of branches or axillary, 4-merous; st. free.

Throughout the Sudan.

The leaves when chewed taste like mustard. The twigs are extensively
used by natives as tooth-brushes (called MISWAK in Arabic). The seeds
yield a bright green oil. A decoction of the bark is used as a vesicant.
The berries are eaten. The tree is said to yield a resin which is useful
in manufacture of varnish.


                              =OLACACEÆ.=


368 =Ximenia americana= _Linn._ KALTO, ALANKUWE, ABUKHAMEIRA, MIDEKA
(Baggara)—Arab; EIL HĀSAL—Hadendowa; DILLUM (J. Daier), NALTI (Dilling),
DUNGUR (J. Eliri) & TINDURE (Kadugli)—Nuba; MELAT—Dinka; ALEMA—Jur;
ALIMU, KRUPU & RUPU—Golo; BIBI—Hameg; M’VOLO—Bongo.

Shrub, or more rarely small tree, armed with sharp spines. Leaves
alternate, simple, entire, oval, 1-2 in. long. Flowers white, in short-
stalked racemes; stamens 8-10; ovary 4-celled. Fruit a drupe, ab. 1 in.
diam., yellow when ripe, acidulated, edible.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung; White Nile,
Kordofan & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces; Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

The wood is used as a substitute for Sandalwood; it is very heavy and
close grained; the bark is employed for tanning leather. The fruit is
eaten, and is useful in cases of habitual constipation and gastric
troubles. The kernel yields a white vegetable butter (Wood).


                              =OPILIACEÆ.=


369 =Opilia amentacea= _Roxb._ KAYU—Bari; KIUNGWAN (Mongalla)—Dinka;
ZEBALABA—Golo.

Climbing shrub; branchlets finely pubescent. Leaves lanceolate to ovate-
lanceolate, often sub-falcate. Flowers minute; yellow in axillary,
bracteate spikes, pentamerous. Fruit a drupe, ovoid, ab. ½ in. long.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (near Dilling); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (two varieties); Mongalla Prov.


                             =LORANTHACEÆ.=


370 =Loranthus curviflorus= _Benth._

Woody, evergreen tree-parasite; twigs jointed. Leaves opp. or alt.,
linear to ovate-oblong, ¾-2½ in. long; umbels solitary 4-6 flowered;
peduncle ¼ in. long; bract minute; calyx minute; cor. 1¾ in. long, of 5
separate petals reflexed above the middle; st. 5, under 1 in. long,
inserted near base of petals. Fr. baccate.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° Lat. N.).


=L. Acaciæ= _Zucc._ GULA (Blue Nile), ANABA or SAM (Baggara), ABU HAMĀDA
or ABHAMĀDA (North Sudan)—Arab; HAMILTOB—Rashida; INGYIL (Dilling) &
ANABA (Kadugli)—Nuba.

Parasitic, as above. Leaves opp. or subopp., oblong to lanceol.-oblong,
1½-4½ in. long. Umbels axillary, 1-2 flowered. Fl. 5-merous,
gamopetalous, scarlet, 1½ in. long, cor. 5, gibbous at base; lobes
reflexed from the middle, but slit to within ¼ in. of base.

Widely distributed. Red Sea Prov.; Dongola Prov. (Wad El Merakh); Berber
Prov.; Kassala Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Jebelein);
Kordofan Prov. (Melbes); Darfur Prov. (Surutj District, Wadi Hashaba).

Good camel fodder. Host plants are _Cordia Rothii_, _Acacia Seyal_,
_Sesbania ægyptiaca_, _Tamarix articulata_, _Acacia Suma_, _Zizyphus
mucronata_.


=L. Dregei= _Eckl._ & _Zeyh._ =var. kerenicus= _Sprague._

Parasite, as above; young parts rusty-tomentose. Leaves ovate-oblong to
suborbicular 1½-3 in. long, opp. Heads axillary, fascicled, 2-4
flowered; bracts spoon-shaped, ¼ in. long; cor. 2 in. long, densely
silky rufous-hairy, base gibbous; lobes reflexed from ab. the middle;
anthers linear, 2-horned.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).

Parasitic on _Combretum Hartmannianum_.


=L. djurensis= _Engl._

Parasitic. Leaves opp. or alt., ovate or lanceolate, 2-4 in. long.
Umbels 3-5 flowered; cor. 1¾ in. long, tube funnel-shaped, split down
one side, ribbed; lobes 5, erect ⅓ in. long, strap-shaped, separating
from below upwards; st. 5, ¼ in. long, inserted high up.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur; Wau River).


=L. platyphyllus= _Hochst._

Parasitic. Leaves variable in insertion and shape, lanceolate to
obovate, up to 4½ in. long. Umbels axillary, solitary 5-8 flowered; cor.
orange-red, ab. 2 in. long, tube split down one side, shorter than lobes
which are erect, separating from below upwards.

Fung Prov. (Danga, Jongol’s Post District).


=L. globiferus= _A. Rich._ =var. verrucosus= _Sprague._ AMAU—Jur.

Parasitic. Leaves ovate- to lanceolate-oblong 1-4½ in. long, thick.
Umbels axillary, fascicled, 4-6 flowered; cor. ab. 1½ in. long, swollen
above and at base, reddish; tube slit on one side; cor. lobes ¼ in.
long, reflexed, spathulate; st. short.

Nubia (between Korosko & Berber); Blue Nile Prov. (Wad Medani, Sennar,
Rahad); Fung. Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.;
Darfur Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur-land); Mongalla Prov. (Atem Branch at Jonglei).

The root is said to be used in the Bahr El Ghazal Province for making a
lotion for itch.

Host plants are _Khaya senegalensis_, _Zizyphus mucronata_, _Cratæva
religiosa_ and _Acacia tortilis_.

=var. salicifolius= _Sprague._

Leaves lin.-lanceolate or lin.-oblanceolate, 2½-4 in. long.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 7,000 ft.)

Parasitic on a _Cordia_.


=L. Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Parasitic. Leaves opp. or subopp., broadly ovate, 2-3 in. long, cuneate
to cordate. Umbels axillary, solitary, 9-10 flowered; cor. under 1½ in.
long, pilose outside, swollen at each end; tube slit ab. ½ in. down;
lobes erect, ⅓ in. long, spoon-shaped; filaments toothed near apex.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: J. Ghattas).

Parasitic on _Ficus platyphylla_ Del.


=L. celtidifolius= _Engl._

Parasite; young parts rusty-pilose; branchlets lenticellate. Leaves opp.
or subopp., ovate-oblong, 1½-3 in. long. Umbels axillary, solitary or
ternate, 9-13 flowered; cor. showy, scarlet, 1⅓ in. long, swollen both
ends; upper end 5-keeled, tube slit ½ in. down; lobes erect, spoon-
shaped; filam. toothed.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500-8,000 ft).


                             =SANTALACEÆ.=


371 =Thesium Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Spreading perennial, up to 9 in. high; branches 4-angled. Leaves ab. ¾
in. long, linear, keeled. Infl. arranged raceme-like at ends of short
branches and subtended by ⅓ in. long bract and 2 small bracteoles; per.
minute, green, 4-5 lobed, valvate, hairy at tip; st. 4-5 small. Fr.
globose, 10-ribbed, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Khor Mulmul).


                              =RHAMNACEÆ.=


372 =Zizyphus orthacantha= _DC._

Shrub or small tree, armed or unarmed. Leaves oblong to orbicular, 3-5
nerved from the base, glabrous above, shortly ferruginous-tomentose
below and on extremities. Flowers greenish, in small axillary cymes.
Fruit edible.

Kordofan Prov. (Masgul & J. Sungor); Upper Nile Prov. (Kodok).


=Z. abyssinica= _Hochst._

Differs from above in its broadly ovate, acute leaves, very oblique at
the base and 2-5 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas: Bongo-land:
Sabbi); Fung Prov. (Roseires); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli).


=Z. Spina-Christi= _Lam._ SIDDIR & NABAK—Arab; BUSA (fruit GHOT)—Hameg.

Very thorny shrub; prickles usually one straight and one recurved.
Leaves ovate to lanceolate, equal at the base, crenate-serrate, 1-3 in.
long. Fruit edible.

Khartoum Prov. (6th cataract); Blue Nile Prov. (Eilafun); North Sudan.


=Z. mucronata= _Willd._ SIDDIR, & NABBAK EL FIL—Arab; GABĀT &
TAGABA—Hadendowa; KASSLA—Rashida; KWAII (Dilling), TITTAWYI (J. Eliri) &
TINGRA (Kadugli)—Nuba; LĀNG—Shilluk; LANGI & LUKATI—Bari; LĀNG (Kaka &
Kenissa) or LĀNT (Kenissa) & LANF (Renk)—Dinka; BWAU—Nuer; OM
KURSAN—Hameg.

Small tree or large shrub, armed or unarmed. Leaves broadly ovate or
ovate-cordate mucronate, crenate-serrate. Cymes 10-20 flowered.

Red Sea Prov.; Kassala Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (mouth of Bahr El
Arab); Red Sea Prov.; White Nile Provinces; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Mongalla
Prov.

The fruit is edible; the wood is light pink in colour, hard and durable.


373 =Mæsopsis sp.=

Tree 20 ft.; branchlets lenticellate. Leaves obovate, obtusely
acuminate, 4-4½ in. long, 2-2½ in. broad, glabrous. Young fruits
globose, small, with the style persistent.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


                      =AMPELIDACEÆ (or VITACEÆ).=


374 =Ampelocissus abyssinica= _Hochst._

Woody climber; leaves 3-lobed, glabrous, rotundate-cordate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: by the Gendua River).


=A. cavicaulis= _Pl._

Leaves large, palmate to pedate-partite, 5 principal lobes reaching ⅔ or
¾ of the way down.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, & Niamniam-land: by the
Nabambisso River).


=A. pentaphylla= _Pl._

Semi-herbaceous climber. Leaves 3-5 partite, lobes linear, loosely
serrate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Bahr El Jebel (Mongalla Prov. & Madi).


=A. Grantii= _Pl._

Climber; leaves almost rotundate, slightly or deeply 5-lobed.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-Ghattas).


=A. Schimperiana= _Hochst._

Strong woody climber. Leaves large, slightly 5-lobed, rufous-villous
when young. Fruit oblong, edible.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=A. cinnamochroa= _Pl._

Much like the preceding.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=A. bombycina= _Pl._

Leaves distinctly 3-5 lobed with rounded sinuses; young shoots densely
silky-tomentose; stems herbaceous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


=A. sarcocephala= _Pl._

Leaves 5-partite; segments lanceolate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


375 =Cissus populnea= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Leaves almost rotundate, undivided, slightly mucronate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land & Dar Fertit).

Large creeper used for jungle ropes.


=C. bignonioides= _Schweinf._

Fairly large climber with corky stems; leaves ovate, cordate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Boddo River).


=C. rubiginosa= _Pl._ KISKI—Zande.

Leaves almost pentagonal, denticulate; leaves and shoots with dense
silky rusty tomentum.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Kishi River).


=C. producta= _Afzel._ BULAKOLIN (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka; YIAD—Jur.

Ascending undershrub or woody climber; leaves simple, lanceolate; joints
thickened.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

The tubers, which are spindle-shaped, are used by Dinkas against tse-tse
bites on animals, an emulsion of crushed tubers and water is rubbed over
the animals’ bodies and a small quantity is also given to them to drink
as a preventive.


=C. cornifolia= _Baker._

Sub-erect undershrub, densely ferruginous when young. Leaves 3-nerved,
palmate or ovate.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (near J. Eliri); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel
(Madi).

Fruit edible.


=C. quadrangularis= _Linn._ SALA’ALA’A or SALALA—Arab; METOWI—Rashida;
KĀT-UT—Hadendowa; ATETE (J. Daier) & ULGYIN (Dilling)—Nuba;
MOJUNGI—Bari; ARENG (L. Powendael), & ARNIK (Kenissa & Renk)—Dinka;
MEREKOTI—Golo; MERISH—Hameg; MUNDA—Burun; DEUGANAI—Nuer.

Climber with fleshy quadrangular stem, leafless part of the year. Leaves
ovate to 3-lobed.

Throughout the greater part of the Sudan, especially Nubia.

A preserve of stem, boiled in water, is said to be a useful stomachic.
The juice is used by camel-men to cleanse and heal saddle-galls, and
other sores of camels. In the Bahr El Ghazal it is said to be used for
poisoning arrows.


=C. palmatifida= _Baker._

Sub-erect, woody. Leaves 3-5 lobed, often cut deep down; finely villous
on upper and densely grey matted on under surface. Petals 4.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: below Dimoh & Atena River).


=C. aralioides= _Welw._

Climber, woody below, glabrous. Leaves 5-fol.; leaflets oblong or
slightly obovate 2-3 in. long, faintly denticulate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=C. Ibuensis= _Hook. f._ LIF—Arab.

Herbaceous climber. Leaves 3-fol., irregularly serrate-dentate; fruit
size of a pea.

Nile (between Khartoum & Berber); Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Kordofan
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land); Mongalla Prov.


=C. alnifolia= _Schweinfth._

Herb 6 ft. high. Leaves simple, sessile, ovate-orbicular, 5 in. broad,
denticulate, puberulous below; stipules triangular, acute, ⅓ in. long.
Cymes terminal, glandular.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Kuddu).


=C. juncea= _Webb._

Stem erect; leaves sessile; leaflets 3, subequal, oblong-lanceolate, 6-7
in. long, membranous. Root tuberous.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=C. crinita= _Planch._

Stem hairy; leaves long 3-5 fol.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=C. crotalaroides= _Schwfth._

Erect undershrub. Leaves sessile. Leaflets oblanceolate, acute, 5-6 in.
long, 1-1½ in. broad, doubly serrate, puberulous below. Fruits
pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Deim Zubeir & Jur-land: Zeriba Abu-Gurun).


=C. adenantha= _Fresen._ LODOREH—Bari.

Green climber; leaves pedate, with 4-7 leaflets.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=C. adenocaulis= _Steud._

Stem, woody, trailing; leaves compound, one terminal leaflet and one
pair on either side, or, sometimes, 7 leaflets.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Niamniam-lands).


=C. Schweinfurthii= _Pl._

Leaves trifoliolate, sessile; leaflets oblanceolate, repand-dentate,
about 4 in. long, 1¼ in. broad, shortly pubescent below. Cymes
tomentose. Tendrils much twisted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land: Addai).


=C. serpens= _Hochst._

Stout herbaceous climber. Leaves digitately 5-7 fol.; sessile or short-
stalked. Leaflets obovate-lanceolate, irregularly inciso-dentate, the
veins beneath grey-downy.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Kordofan Prov. (Umlabia).


=C. pallida= _Wight._ & _Arn._ ABANGIUR—Dinka; DELE—Golo.

Trailing or slightly climbing, semi-woody shrub. Leaves cordate, not
lobed, faintly denticulate, glabrous.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=C. mossambicensis= _Klotzsch._

Woody climber. Leaves orbicular or reniform, more or less entire to
deeply 5-lobed, with irregular, mucronate teeth. Flowers in densely
compound lateral cymes.

Mongalla Prov.


=C. gracilis= _Guill._ & _Perr._

Slender climber. Leaves pedate; leaflets 5, the shorter forked, all thin
of texture.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=C. intricata= _Baker._ LIF or LUFA—Arab.

Slender woody climber; leaflets 3-5, pedate, firmly membranous. Flowers
in 4-6 in. broad cymes.

White Nile Prov.


=C. Thonningii= _Baker._

Leaves 3-5 fol., serrate; leaflets distinctly stalked, edges loosely
crenate. Flowers in lax, branched cymes. 4-6 in. broad.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dilling).


=C. Figariana= _Webb._

Erect, hairy undershrub. Leaves 5-7 fol.

Nubia.


=C. cyphopetala= _Pres._

Climber with puberulous stems and softly tomentose serrate leaflets and
broad open cymes of small flowers.

Red Sea Prov. (Has Has).


                               =RUTACEÆ.=


376 =Ruta tuberculata= _Forsk._

Herb with tubercled glands; leaves linear, with pellucid glands. Flowers
usually 5-merous; petals entire.

Nubia; Berber Prov. (Berber Desert); Khartoum Prov. (Halfaya); White
Nile Prov.; Red Sea Prov. (Khors, Karora-hills).

Yields a volatile oil, which may act as an irritant when the plant is
handled.


377 =Teclea nobilis= _Hook. f._ FURFURRUK (J. Daier)—Nuba; FIK—Bari;
SEKIA—Golo.

Unarmed large shrub or small tree; leaves 3-fol., large. Flowers
unisexual. Male flowers 4-merous, sessile in branching panicles shorter
than leaves. Female flowers in short axillary spikes.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Wau, Bongo-land:
Dukuttu & Mittu-land: by the Rohl River); Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Tombé).

The wood is used for spear shafts in Bahr El Ghazal and for bark mallets
in Uganda.


377a =Toddalia aculeata= _Pers._

Erect or scrambling shrub, armed with recurved prickles. Leaves 3-fol.,
alternate, with pellucid glands; petioles often with prickles beneath.
Flowers unisexual, cream coloured, panicled.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


378 =Clausena anisata= _Oliv._

Shrub with pinnate leaves, which are 6-12 in. long; leaflets 10-20,
ovate or ovate-oblong. Flowers white, numerous on axillary, paniculate
cymes; stamens 8-10. Berry 1-seeded.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Wau & Deim Zubeir).


379 =Citrus Aurantium= _Linn._

=var. amara= L. NARING—Arab. The Bitter Orange.

Grown throughout the country in gardens; frequently used as a stock for
the sweet orange, mandarin and sweet lemon.

=var. sinensis= _Gall. Citr._ BORTUGAN—Arab. The Sweet Orange.

Grown throughout the country in gardens.


=C. decumana= _Linn._ LIMUN HINDI—Arab. The Grape Fruit or Shaddock.

Occasionally found in gardens.


=C. medica= _Linn._ =var. Limon= _Gall. Citr._

=subvar. acris.= LIMUN BALADI—Arab. The Lime.

Grown everywhere in gardens and frequently on Sagias.

=subvar. Limetta= _Risso._ LIMUN HELLU—Arab. The Lemon.

Cultivated in gardens.


=C. nobilis= _Lour._ YUSEF EFFENDI—Arab. The Mandarin.

Cultivated in gardens.


                             =SIMARUBACEÆ.=


380 =Hannoa Schweinfurthii= _Oliv._

Shoots clustered from the old wood. Leaves pinnate; leaflets linear-
oblanceolate, leathery, up to 6 in. long, glabrous, with sunken nerves.
Flowers racemose few. Fruits oblong-ovoid, ¾ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Mts. Nga, near Maalah).


381 =Irvingia Smithii= _Hook. f._

Tree, 40 ft. high. Leaves coriaceous, ovate-elliptical, rounded at base
and more or less cordate, 2-4 in. long. Flowers pale yellow in narrow,
subpaniculate racemes. Fruit oblong, 1½ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-
land: by the Hu River).

The fruit is of no value. The wood is white and very hard.


=I. sp.= DARITAR—Dinka; AKOS—Jur; BILI & M’BILI or TIRI—Golo.

Large, smooth stemmed, riverside tree. Flowers white, fruit blue
drupaceous. Very like the foregoing species.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).

The timber is white, hard, and takes a good polish. It is used for boat-
building.


382 =Balanites ægyptiaca= _Del._ HEGLIG—Arab; ’SASSUD &
SHASHOT—Hadendowa; KORAK (J. Daier), TIRA (Dilling & J. Ghulfan), KURI
(J. Eliri) & N’DMUSSO (Kadugli)—Nuba; KHA—Hameg; SORONGO—Golo; LALLOK &
LUMILI—Bari; TAU (usual) & TU (Kaka)—Dinka; TAU—Jur & Nuer; TU—Shilluk;
TOAN—Burun; Fruit LALOB—Arab; FIATH—Nuer (young tree).

Large tree armed with straight green spines, which are supra-axillary or
axillary. Leaves 2-fol., entire. Flowers axillary, solitary or in pairs,
greenish-white. Disk fleshy, covered with white hairs. Drupe up to 2 in.
long, with a bony endocarp.

Found throughout the greater part of the Sudan especially in the Fung
and Upper White Nile Provinces.

=var. membranacea= _Van Tiegh._

Dongola Prov. (Debba).

The fruit, called LALOB, is edible; it has a bitter sweet flavour and
aperient qualities. The root, bark and leaves are purgative, and act as
a vermifuge. The kernel yields an oil which is used as an unguent. The
wood is hard, compact and fine grained, it is durable and resists the
attacks of insects. The bark yields a strong fibre, and is also used as
a soap for washing clothes.


383 =Harrisonia abyssinica= _Oliv._ KARB EL WADI—Arab; KIREILLI—Bari.

Large shrub; leaves imparipinnate, with winged petiole; leaflets 3 pairs
and an odd one. Flowers small in axillary or subterminal cymes.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Jebel; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-
land: Gir & Addai, Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


384 =Klainedoxa oblongifolia= _Stapf._

Shrub 15 ft. high. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, about 12 in. long and 4 in.
broad on the young shoots, the older shoots with much smaller leaves;
stipules very long (about 6 in.) acuminate. Fruits very hard,
4-6-angled, 1½ in. in diam.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


                             =BURSERACEÆ.=


385 =Boswellia papyrifera= _A. Rich._ ROTARO, or RUTRUT, TAKTAK (Abu
Gibeiha) or TARAKTARAK (Talodi) (Baggara), GAFĀL—Arab; HĀDA (Dilling) &
LAGI (J. Eliri)—Nuba; GULGULA—Hameg. Called “Elephant tree” by Europeans
because elephants feed on it.

Tree with imparipinnate leaves and papery bark, often found on
quartzitic soils. Flowers pink, in umbellate racemes, appearing before
the leaves, hermaphrodite; stamens 10. Capsule trigonous, 1 in. long.

Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov., Darfur Province.

Yields a fragrant resin.


386 =Commiphora Opobalsamum= _Engl._

Spineless shrub or small tree. Leaflets 3-5, entire or slightly
undulate; leaves scattered or in fascicles. Flowers small, fascicled.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin).

Yields the “Mecca Balsam” or “Balm of Gilead.” It is much used in Cairo
as medicine. The fruit is considered a powerful carminative and
digestive.


=C. erythræa= _Engl._

Small tree. Leaflets 3, obovate, pubescent, the terminal one about 1½
in. long, crenulate. Fruits subglobose, pubescent, about ⅓ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (coast).


=C. quadricincta= _Schweinfth._

Small bushy tree, growing on rocky hills; branches spiny. Leaves simple,
ovate-elliptic, rounded at the apex, 1¼ in. long, ½-¾ in. broad,
glabrous, long-stalked. Fruits 4-winged.

Kassala Prov. (J. Erimbat at Goz Regeb).


=C. abyssinica= _Engl._

Small tree with spiny branches. Leaves trifoliolate but sessile or
subsessile and thus appearing simple; leaflets obovate, crenate,
glabrous, about 1¼ in. long. Fruit ovoid, acute, ⅓ in. long, glabrous.

Kassala Prov. (near J. Langeb); Red Sea Prov. (J. Shabba, south of
Suakin).


=C. africana= _Engl._ GAFĀL—Arab; KIRBI (Dilling)—Nuba; TOWOLLO—Burun.

Small spiny tree. Leaves usually 3-fol.; leaflets cuneate, broadly
crenate-serrate. Flowers fasciculate. Drupe subglobose, slightly
oblique.

Kordofan & Nuba Mts. Provinces.

The resin is a form of Bdellium, a drug resembling Myrrh.


=C. pedunculata= _Engl._ LUBAN—Arab; HĀDA (Dilling)—Nuba;
DAMFULAN—Hameg.

Small tree. Leaves more or less fascicled at extremities; leaflets 5-11,
serrate-dentate, pubescent. Flowers in pedunculate, axillary, few-
flowered cymes.

Fung, Kordofan, Nuba Mts. & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.

Yields a resin similar to Olibanum.


387 =Canarium Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Large tree with imparipinnate leaves; leaflets oblong, acuminate,
subcordate at the base, about 6 in. long and 1½ in. broad, softly
pubescent on the nerves below. Flowers in panicles with large bracts.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Yuru River); Lado District.

The sap-wood is whitish, the heart-wood rose-colour, similar to a Khaya;
useful for carpentry. The resin is used by the Niamniam for torches, and
when ground down with oil for anointing the body. Fruit eaten.


                              =MELIACEÆ.=


388 =Turræa Vogelii= _Hook. f._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves simple, alternate, elliptical, entire.
Flowers white, on axillary peduncles bearing 2-10 umbellate pedicels;
stamens 10, monadelphous; staminal tube with subulate teeth; anthers
apiculate. Ovary 9-12 celled.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=T. nilotica= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._ KHARIF (J. El Amira)—Nuba.

Shrub or small tree. Leaves obovate obtuse, tomentose beneath. Flowers
in many-flowered umbellate, sessile fascicles. Teeth of staminal tube
triangular or oblong. Ovary 10-celled.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dar Nuba on rocky hills); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-
land: by the Pwah); Bahr El Jebel.


389 =Azadirachta indica= _A. Juss._

Large tree; leaves imparipinnate. Leaflets 2-9 pairs with a terminal
one, which is sometimes wanting. Flowers white, honey-scented. Drupe
size of an olive, purple when ripe, 1-celled.

Introduced. The Neem Tree of India.

A handsome quick-growing shade tree, suitable to dry localities, and a
great improvement on the “Persian Lilac.” The timber is valuable, and
grows to a useful size.


390 =Melia Azedarach= _Linn._ ZINZILAKH (Egypt)—Arab. Persian lilac.

Moderate-sized tree with bipinnate leaves. Drupe ovoid, yellow when
ripe; flowers white and purple, scented. Fruit 5-celled; endocarp bony.

Introduced. Khartoum Prov., etc.


391 =Ekebergia Rüppeliana= _A. Rich._

Tree; fruit fleshy, globose, 2-celled. Leaves 6-12 in. long,
imparipinnate, collected at the extremities; leaflets 5-9, coriaceous.
Flowers in axillary, pedunculate racemes. Stamens 10 monadelphous,
margin of tube dentate.

Fung Prov.


392 =Trichilia emetica= _Vahl._ UM-SHARA, UMHAGRI & occasionally DABKAR
(Baggara)—Arab; TISHU—Hameg; HORURI (Dilling)—Nuba.

Tree with pinnate leaves and pubescent young parts; leaflets 7-10,
obtuse, pubescent beneath. Flowers ¾ in. diam., in short axillary
panicles; stamens 8-10 monadelphous. Capsule 3-valved; seeds with a
scarlet arillus.

Blue Nile Prov. (Medani & Khor Dahab); Fung, White Nile, Nuba Mts. &
Bahr El Ghazal Provinces; Mongalla Prov. (Hillet El Nuer & Gondokoro).

The seeds yield an oil which is used in cookery and in soap-making. The
wood polishes well and makes pretty furniture. The bark is said to act
as an emetic when given in small doses.


=T. retusa= _Oliv._ SABRONGO—Golo.

Small tree with white flowers in axillary panicles; fruit a flat
capsule. Leaves 3-5 fol., leaflets retuse-truncate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Khors).

The ashes of the leaves are used as a substitute for salt.


393 =Khaya senegalensis= _A. Juss._ HOMRA, HOMRAYA or MURRAYA—Arab;
TIT—Dinka; BELE—Golo; TIDO or TIRO—Jur; KIR—Bari; BOGU—Zande.

Large tree with abruptly pinnate leaves. Flowers white, in large
panicles, unisexual; fruit a globose capsule, 2½ in. diam., dehiscing
into 4 valves. Seeds flat, disk-like with a winged membranous edge.

Darfur, Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.

African Mahogany. The wood cuts into very fine planks, and is suitable
for cabinet work and joinery. Oil from the seeds is said to be used to
keep flies from cattle.


=K. Dawei= _Stapf._ BOGU—Zande.

A very large tree. Leaves pinnate; leaflets obliquely elliptic, shortly
acuminate, about 6 in. long and 2 in. broad, glabrous. Flowers small,
paniculate. Sepals and petals rounded. Stamens in a tube. Fruits
subglobose. Seeds winged.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Linduku stream). Mongalla
Prov.


394 =Pseudocedrela Kotschyi= _Harms._ DURUBA—Arab; POIK (Goz El Siada) &
PHUT (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka; GUMBERTI and ZILI—Golo; PHUT—Jur;
KOLKO—Burun; RIR—Nuer; N’ZUMMUNIA—Zande; KAHILI—Bongo.

Small to moderate sized tree, with rough bark. Leaves pinnate; leaflets
alternate, 4-7 pairs, up to 2 in. long, loosely dentate, pubescent.
Flowers in axillary panicles, unisexual, white, crowded towards ends of
branches. Fruit a 4-5 in. long, somewhat pyriform capsule, splitting
into 4-5 valves; seed with a long wing on one side.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat
River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

The wood is handsome and fragrant and is suited to the manufacture of
gun stocks and for joinery.


=P. sp.=

Leaflets sub-opposite, about 3 pairs, the terminal leaflet largest, all
oblong-lanceolate, subacute, 3½-5 in. long, 1-1½ in. broad, closely
reticulate, glabrous. Flowers in lax, slender panicles. Buds subglobose,
glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Deim Guju).


                             =SAPINDACEÆ.=


395 =Paullinia pinnata= _Linn._

Semi-herbaceous climber. Leaves imparipinnate, 5-fol.; stalk winged.
Flowers small, white, numerous, clustered on racemes 3-4 in. long, with
a woody spiral tendril at the base. Capsule woody 3-angled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. to Belgian Congo Border.

The leaves and roots are used on the Gold Coast for dysentery. The bark
of the root contains a narcotic poison; both it and the seeds are used
for stupefying fish.


396 =Cardiospermum Corindum= _Linn._

Slender climber with watch-spring-like tendrils. Leaves imparipinnate,
leaflets toothed, pubescent below; stalk not winged. Flowers pale
yellow. Fruits bladdery.

Red Sea Prov. (near Erkowit & 21° N.L.).


=C. Halicacabum= _Linn._ GODOBO (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Slender herbaceous climber with bi-ternate leaves and inflated, 3-valved
roundish membranous capsule. Flowers white; tendrils opposite,
circinate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El
Zeraf); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land, Gumango Hill).

=var. microcarpum= _H.B._ & _K._

Similar to above but capsule smaller and obversely deltoid.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Upper White Nile
Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Mongalla Prov.

The root is described as possessing emetic, laxative, stomachic and
rubefacient properties. The leaves and young stems are sometimes cooked
as a vegetable, the seeds are used as a tonic.


397 =Schmidelia rubifolia= _Hochst._ SUMEIMA (Fung)—Arab; MEREMERET (J.
Daier)—Nuba.

Low tree with 3-fol. leaves, without stipules. Leaflets obovate-cuneate,
more or less crenate, the lower surface grey-downy. Flowers on axillary
racemes 2-3 in. long.

Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli & J. Daier); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Dar Fertit & Jur-land); Mongalla Prov.


=S. africana= _DC._

Tree, 30-40 ft. high. Leaflets 3, nearly sessile, the central one 4-6
in. long, oblong-cuneate, with the cuneate base entire and upper edges
distantly and bluntly toothed. Flowers in axillary and terminal
panicles.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land & Niamniam-land: at Tuhami’s Zariba).

The fruits are used in Abyssinia as a remedy for tapeworm; the wood is
described as very strong and close grained.


=S. Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Shrub; leaves 3-fol.; leaflets obovate-oblanceolate, acute, denticulate
in the upper part, 3½-5 in. long, 1½-2 in. broad, glabrous. Panicles
lax, long and slender, puberulous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


=S. cf. S. Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._ TULŪNG (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Shrub; leaves 3-fol.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri).


=S. sp. (or Rhus sp.).= KURINYIL (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Shrub; leaves 3-fol.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri).


398 =Aporrhiza paniculata= _Radlk._

Tree. Leaves pinnate; leaflets oblong-elliptic, emarginate, about 6 in.
long and 2½ in. broad, reticulate, glabrous. Flowers small, widely
paniculate. Fruits 2-lobed, flat, 1 in. broad, tomentose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


399 =Dodonæa viscosa= _Linn._ TATTAS—Hadendowa; TASHAS—Rashida.

Shrub or small tree with glossy, linear-lanceolate leaves. Flowers
polygamous, in short terminal panicles, yellowish; sepals 5; petals
none. Capsule with 2-4 membranous wings.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has to 22° N.L.).

A useful and attractive hedge plant. The wood is close-grained, hard and
durable, pores moderately fine, irregularly distributed, medullary rays
very numerous, indistinct. The plant is reputed to possess some
medicinal properties, both as a febrifuge, and when boiled with water as
an embrocation for sprains, bruises, etc.


                            =ANACARDIACEÆ.=


400 =Mangifera indica= _Linn._ Mango.

Evergreen tree. Leaves coriaceous, entire, oblong-lanceolate, up to 12
in. long.

Introduced.

Grown in gardens throughout the country. Some varieties form handsome
trees bearing excellent fruit.


401 =Rhus villosa= _Linn._

Shrub, sometimes thorny; leaves 3-fol. Leaflets obovate to oblanceolate,
obtuse, often apiculate.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra); Bahr El Jebel.


=R. near R. villosa= _Linn._ SAMŌT—Hadendowa.

Shrub; leaves trifol.; leaflets obovate, crenate, about 1 in. long,
pubescent below. Flowers and fruit not seen.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,000-7,500 ft.).

Fruit said to be eaten.


=R. abyssinica= _Hochst._ ALONGKOY—Dinka; VULASIM—Golo; AKNALKUALA—Jur;
SAMŌT or SAMOP—Hadendowa.

Shrub; leaves 3-fol.; leaflets oval or oblanceolate, obtuse or acute,
pubescent, not reticulate above. Flowering panicles hairy, axillary,
shorter than the leaves.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has).


=R. oxyacantha= _Schousb._

Branches spiny. Leaves trifoliolate; leaflets obovate-cuneate, coarsely
crenate, ½-¾ in. long, ciliate. Flowers very small, in short panicles.
Fruit shining, ⅓ in. in diam.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=R. glaucescens= _A. Rich._

Shrub; leaves 3-fol., coriaceous. Leaflets glabrous or puberulous along
the midrib, oval to lanceolate, obtuse, entire to crenulate-dentate.
Panicles shorter than the leaves, axillary.

Upper Blue Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=R. pulcherrima= _Oliv._

Shrub; leaves simple, alternate, 4-10 in. long, oblong or oblong
elliptical, with minute silvery tomentum beneath.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile
Prov. (Bahr El Jebel).


=R. insignis= _Del._ LAHLA or LALAI—Hadendowa.

Tree or shrub; leaves simple, approximate, in threes; fruit black
resinous.

Red Sea Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov.


=R. dioica= _Willd._

Armed shrub; leaflets 3, broad crenate.

Red Sea Prov. (22° N.L.)


402 =Odina fruticosa= _Hochst._ LEYUN—Arab; KOWA—Hameg; TILLA—Burun.

Moderate-sized tree; leaves pinnate, 9-15 fol., at length glabrous,
present when flowers appear; leaflets obliquely lanceolate, subsessile.
Flowers 4-merous in stout, fulvous, axillary spikes.

Red Sea Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Jebelein); Nuba Mts. Prov.;
Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

This tree and other species of Odina yield a gum.


=O. Schimperi= _Hochst._ AMZAQ (Baggara)—Arab; HAMMADAI—Hadendowa.

Tree; leafless at time of flowering. Leaves imparipinnate, 9-11 fol., at
length glabrous. Leaflets subsessile, oblique at base, narrowly
acuminate. Racemes simple, while in flower terminal on branches.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts.
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=O. Barteri= _Oliv._ HAMADAB—Hadendowa; KLANDA—Golo; WEEDA—Zande.

Middle-sized to large tree, leafless during the dry months. Leaves
pinnate, 7-11 fol., softly hispid pubescent, at length scabrid. Spikes
fascicled on old wood.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Nuba Mts. Prov. (near Talodi); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, Niamniam-land, etc.)

The bast of the bark is made into a rope.


=O. cf. O. Barteri= _Oliv._

Leaves pinnate; leaflets ovate-elliptic, rounded at the base, about 3
in. long and 2 in. broad, softly tomentose below. Fruits oblong, with 3
humps, glabrous, ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Bongo lands).


=O. humilis= _Oliv._ ARISH (Fung), LEYUN (Baggara) & HOMEID
(Kordn.)—Arab.

Shrub or small tree, sometimes gregarious. Leaves pinnate, densely hairy
beneath, 9-11 fol., short; leaflets elliptical to ovate. Flower spikes
up to 1½ in. long, densely tomentose; ovary hairy.

Upper Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Khor Attar);
Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Mongalla Prov.


=O. sp.= N’DU-N’DU—Golo.

Tree. Leaves pinnate; leaflets ovate or elliptic, about 2½ in. long and
1½ in. broad, glabrous. Flowers and fruit not seen.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).

Bark used for ropes.


=O. near microcarpa= _A. Rich._

Small tree.

Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Tombé).


=O. sp.= UMSURUJ (Baggara)—Arab.

Moderate-sized tree.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Homra near Kadugli).


=O. sp.= KULUWEI (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Tree.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri).


403 =Pseudospondias microcarpa= _Engl._

Tree, 80 ft. high. Leaves pinnate; leaflets obliquely ovate-elliptic,
obtusely acuminate, about 6 in. long and 2½ in. broad. Flowers very
small in large panicles. Fruits oblong, ¾ in. long.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Assika).

The fruit is edible.


404 =Sclerocarya near S. Caffra= _Sond._ RUFI—Bari.

Tree with pinnate leaves; leaflets 7-11.

Mongalla Prov. (Sh. Tombé).


=S. Birrea= _Hochst._ HOMEID—Arab; KŌI (J. Eliri), & INDENU
(Kadugli)—Nuba; MAT—Bari; DUNGDUNG—Golo; AKAMIL (Goz El Siada)—Dinka;
KABTI—Burun; ALLANFA—Hameg.

Tree with pinnate leaves. Leaflets 9-23, oblong-, ovate-, or obovate-
elliptical, usually mucronate, entire or toothed, up to 2 in. long. Male
flowers in short spikes or racemes; drupes solitary, size of a walnut.

Fung, Nuba Mts. & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces; Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz
El Siada); Mongalla Prov.

The wood is used for making vessels for holding food.

Fruit eaten.


                             =CONNARACEÆ.=


405 =Byrsocarpus pseudobaccatus= _Schellenb._

Tree 20 ft. high. Leaves pinnate; leaflets elliptic to obovate, obtuse,
3-4 in. long, 1½-2 in. broad, glabrous. Racemes in dense fascicles.
Fruit curved, ¾ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


405a =Rourea gudjuana= _Gilg._

Shrub. Leaves pinnate; leaflets ovate or ovate-lanceolate, obtusely
acuminate, 2½-4 in. long, ¾-1½ in. broad, reticulate. Racemes densely
fasciculate, axillary. Fruits ovoid-lanceolate, acute, ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Deim Gudju).


406 =Agelæa Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Shrub, 8 ft. high. Leaves pinnate; leaflets ovate-elliptic, shortly
acuminate, about 3½ in. long and 2 in. broad, glabrous. Flowers in
terminal panicles. Fruit obliquely obovoid, tomentellous, ½ in. long.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Diagbe River).


407 =Cnestis cf. C. oblongifolia= _Baker._

Woody climber. Flowers white, without smell; fruit orange, acid. Leaves
imparipinnate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River). Fruit orange-
acid.


                             =UMBELLIFERÆ.=


408 =Hydrocotyle asiatica= _Linn._

Perennial herb giving out long runners from axils of leaves on root-
stock. Leaves from root-stock or 1 or 2 together from nodes of runners,
reniform, shallowly crenate. Flowers subsessile, usually 3 together at
end of short erect peduncles, pink. Peduncles 1-3 from nodes opposite
the leaves. Fruit ovoid, hard with primary and secondary ribs obscure.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Tuhami’s Zeriba).


=H. natans= _Cyr._

Creeping perennial, rooting at nodes. Leaves long-petioled,
suborbicular, shallow-crenate, subpeltate. Umbels ab. 7 flowered. Fruit
minute, longitudinally ridged.

Bahr El Zeraf; Bahr El Jebel (Sudd to Bor).


409 =Pimpinella etbaica= _Schwfth._

Annual up to 1 ft. high. Leaves, the lower long petioled, pinnately
tripartite, the upper variously trifid. Umbels compound, primary rays
3-7, secondary 7-12, involucres absent. Flowers white or violet; fruit
covered with hooked hairs.

Red Sea Prov. (above 2,000 ft.).


410 =Diplolophium abyssinicum= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._

Perennial 2-5 ft. high, sometimes perfumed like peppermint. Leaves up to
1 ft. and more long, many times divided, segments filiform; petioles up
to 5 in. long, sheathing. Umbels compound, primary rays numerous from an
involucre of stout 1 in. long, pubescent bracts; secondary rays
numerous, from involucels of ab. ½ in. long bracteoles. Flowers
comparatively large, hermaphrodite. Petals emarginate. Fruit cylindrical
with 2 long styles.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land: steppes near the Kishi River); Darfur Prov. (Jebel
Marra, 8,000 ft.).


411 =Fœniculum vulgare= _Gærth._ Common Fennel.

Herb 2-3 ft. high. Leaves 3-4 times pinnate; segments narrow, linear.
Umbels compound, without involucres, 15-20 rays in umbel. Fruit ¼ in.
long, oval, slightly compressed laterally; vittæ conspicuous under the
furrows.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 5-9,000 ft.).


412 =Sium Thunbergii= _DC._ Prod.

Marsh herb, with runners. Leaves pinnate, dentate, 1 ft. long, with
sheathing, auricled petiole 5 in. long. Umbels compound; rays numerous
with many-leaved involucres and involucels. Fruit shortly ovoid,
compressed.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.).


=S. angustifolium= _Linn._

Perennial up to 2 ft. high. Leaves pinnate; segments of lower leaves
8-10 pairs and an odd one, ovate-lanceolate, serrate; upper leaves,
segments less numerous, but larger and more deeply toothed or lobed.
Umbels compound with primary and secondary involucres, lateral; carpels
with 5 slender ribs and several vittæ.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.).


413 =Peucedanum Grantii= _Kingston._

Stout glabrous herb up to 7 ft. high. Lower leaves bipinnate, upper
ternate, on dilated petioles. Umbels compound, paniculate on a distinct
peduncle; primary rays numerous with no involucre or only 1 small bract;
secondary numerous; involucel of several bracteoles. Fruit ⅓ in. long,
with 3 longitudinal ridges.

White Nile Prov.


=P. graveolens= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._ The Dill Plant.

Erect, glabrous annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves much divided; segments
linear-bristly. Umbels compound, many-rayed. Involucre and involucels
none. Flowers yellow. Fruit 1/5 in. oval oblong, compressed, ridged,
with lateral wings.

Darfur Prov.

Cultivated.


=P. fraxinifolium= _Hiern._ ASAD EL TUGULE & ASAT EL GIRD
(Baggara)—Arab; DAHKIKAK (J. Daier), KOTUNDURAK (J. Eliri) & N’DARABWA
(Kadugli)—Nuba.

Small fleshy tree. Leaves pinnate; leaflets 9. Umbels compound, arranged
together, on about ½ a dozen 5 in. long peduncles at end of branches.
Fruit obovate, broadly winged.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (on rocks); Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Belgian Congo
(Niamniam-land: Wando’s country).


414 =Coriandrum sativum= _Linn._ Common Coriander.

Erect branching annual up to 18 in. high. Lower leaves pinnatifid or
bipinnatifid; upper leaves much divided with linear segments. Umbels
terminal, of 5-8 rays. Involucre none, involucels of few bracts. Fruit
globose, ribs not very prominent, vittæ none.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.).


                              =ERICACEÆ.=


415 =Blæria spicata= _Hochst._

Heath-like low shrub. Leaves alt., or more commonly 3 whorled, linear to
lanceolate, revolute. Fl. up to ¼ in. long, pink, in leafy racemes from
upper axils, 4-merous; anthers 4, 2-lobed, opening by terminal pores and
with 2 short basal bristles. Capsule 4-valved.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 8,500-9,000 ft.).


                              =EBENACEÆ.=


416 =Euclea Kellau= _Hochst._ GUM or OGUM—Hadendowa.

Shrub with subopposite, bright green, coriaceous leaves, obovate or
lanceolate, 1-2 in. long. Fl. white, heath-like, in 9-12 flowered
racemes, diœcious; male fl. with 12 stamens. Fruit globose, ¼ in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has).

Fruit eaten.


417 =Maba abyssinica= _Hiern._ GUGHAN & JUKHAN—Arab; SHOM—Dinka;
SHOMU—Golo; MIENNA—Burun.

Small tree. Leaves alt., lanceolate-oblong, 2-5 in. long. Fl. axillary,
subsessile, clustered, diœcious, mostly trimerous; male fl. minute;
stamens 14, mostly in pairs; fem. fl. 3-5 together; style 3-dentate;
staminodes 3-4. Fruit subglobose, ½ in. diam.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Wau);
Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.

Wood dark, takes a fine polish, is used for gun stocks.


=M. sp.=

Shrub. Leaves alt., lanceolate, 2 in. long, ¾ in. broad, glabrous.
Fruits sessile, oblong-ellipsoid, ½ in. long, glabrous, girt by the
persistent cupular calyx.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: near the Teh).


418 =Diospyros mespiliformis= _Hochst._ GUGHAN & JUKHAN—Arab; ARĪAP &
ARIAI—Hadendowa; SHŪM (Dilling) & KWAR (J. Eliri)—Nuba; KUMI—Bari;
SHOM—Dinka; CHUMU or SHOMU—Golo; KOLOME—Bongo or Zande.

Tree, sometimes large, with black bark. Leaves alt., oblong to obovate
2-6 in. long. Fl. white diœcious; infl. axillary, short. Male fl.
ferruginous-tomentose, 5, occasionally 4-merous, small; stamens 10-16,
often in pairs; fem. fl. 1-3 together, 3-5-merous, staminodes 6-8,
styles 2, bilobed. Fr. subglobose 1 in. diam.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.;
Nuba Mts. Prov. (Gughan); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dinka-land, native
ebony; & Bongo-land, a favourite fruit); Mongalla Prov.

Wood dark, streaked with black near wounds, takes a fine polish. It is
used by natives for making clubs. The heart-wood, which is black,
furnishes one of the ebonies of commerce. Fruit edible.


                              =SAPOTACEÆ.=


419 =Butyrospermum Parkii= _Kotschy._ =var. niloticum= _Kotschy._
LULU—Arab; KOR or KOAR or KORI—Bongo; RAK—Dinka; RIVIA, BAA or BAK—Golo;
RAK or YAU—Jur; RIEK—Nuer.

Large tree with black rough bark, yielding a milky juice producing an
inferior gutta-percha. Leaves crowded at ends of branches, oblong,
sometimes emarginate, 6-9 in. long, coriaceous, glabrous, lateral nerves
prominent, arcuate; petiole 2-3 in. long. Fl. in dense umbels in the
axils of the leaves at the ends of the branchlets; calyx lobes in 2 rows
of 4; cor. segments 8; st. 8; petaloid cuspidate staminodes 8; fruit
subglobose, 1½ to 2 in. long, containing a sweet edible pulp and a seed
not unlike a horse-chestnut.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur. & Mittu lands, Mosanga &
Niamniam country); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).

The wood is very hard and heavy, it is reddish in colour and takes a
fine polish. It is used for mortars, bowls, and for building. The fruit
is edible, and the seed is known in commerce as Shea Nut. The kernels of
the nuts yield about 50 per cent. of fat called Shea Butter, which has
been found useful in the manufacture of candles, soap, and butter
substitutes. Locally it is used by the natives for food, for anointing
the body, and for lighting purposes.


420 =Mimusops Schweinfurthii= _Engl._ BĪ or BEI or IRDOKO—Golo;
NIANLALWEL—Dinka; NIANLALWEL & DENYA—Jur.

Leaves crowded on stout shoots, obovate, emarginate, 4 in. long, 2 in.
broad, silvery silky below. Flowers densely clustered, axillary;
pedicels ⅙ in. long. Sepals pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Bongo lands).

Wood dark-red, very hard. Yields a kind of Gutta-Percha.


=M. Kummel= _Bruce._ NIANLALWEL—Dinka & Jur; PILI—Golo.

Middle-sized tree with dark bark and milky juice. Leaves alt., oblong,
2-3 in. long. Fl. in few-flowered axillary clusters, coated with brown
tomentum; calyx ½ in. long, lobes 8, in 2 rows, cor. white, 24 lobes, 16
in outer and 8 in inner; sta. 8, staminodes 8, linear; fruit ellipsoid,
glabrous, 1 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur. & Bongo-lands).

Wood pale brown, fairly hard, used for spear shafts. The fruit is the
size of a cherry and is edible.


=M. djurensis= _Engl._

Leaves scattered on slender shoots, obovate, obtusely acuminate, 4 in.
long, 2 in. broad, glabrous. Fruit ovoid, slightly pubescent, girt with
the persistent lanceolate sepals.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau, Jur & Bongo lands).


                             =MYRSINACEÆ.=


421 =Mæsa lanceolata= _Forsk._

Tree, 30 ft. high. Leaves alt., oblong-lanceolate, 4-6 in. long,
serrated. Fl. minute, white 5-merous, in axillary panicles 2-4 in. long.
Fruit globose, crowned with persistent style and stigma.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra).


=M. sp.=

Leaves obovate, cuneate at the base, 5 in. long, 2½ in. broad, repand-
dentate, pubescent on the nerves. Racemes axillary, slender. Fl. white,
very small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Boddo River 7,690 Schwfth).


422 =Embelia nilotica= _Oliv._

Large tree; extremities rufous-hairy. Leaves alt., obovate, 3-4 in.
long, glabrous above, hairy beneath, especially on the nerves. Racemes
axillary, 1 in. long; fl. minute, whitish, 5-merous; fr. globose, small.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


                             =LOGANIACEÆ.=


423 =Mostuea Schweinfurthii= _Baker._

Shrub. Leaves opp., oblong, subsessile, 1-2 in. long; stip.
interpetiolar oblong, brown, scarious. Cymes few-flowered, terminal
enclosed in a pair of orbicular bracts, ½ in. long; fl. 5-merous; cor.
white, with 10 yellow streaks in the tube, ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


424 =Nuxia dentata= _R. Br._

Small tree. Leaves opp. or verticillate, lanceolate, 3-4 in. long,
dentate, shining. Fl. small, greenish, 4-merous, in corymbose cymes.

Red Sea Prov. (below Erkowit, in rocky gully).


425 =Anthocleista nobilis= _G. Don._

Tree, 50-60 ft. Leaves opp., obovate, cuneate, 9-12 in. or, in young
plants, up to 4 or 5 ft. long, crowded at ends of branches with pungent
spines between them; petiole dilated at base. Cymes terminal; cor. white
or dull-yellow; lobes about 16, each ½ in. long; st. as many. Fruit
globose, 1 in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River & Boddo River).


=A. Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Tall tree. Leaves opp., oval, oblong to obovate-lanceolate, 6-20 in.
long, coriaceous; petioles 2-3 in. long, auricled, connate. Cymes
compound, 1 ft. long; cor. 1 in. long, lobes and stamens 9-11. Fr.
obovoid-oblong, 1½ in. long.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Mbrwole River).


426 =Strychnos penduliflora= _Baker._

Small tree. Leaves opp., oblong-lanceolate, 2 in. long, 3-nerved from
base. Cymes many-flowered, pendulous; fl. 4-5-merous, minute, white.
Fruit globose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau to Chak Chak).


=S. innocua= _Del._ UMBUKHEISA (Baggara) & HOG EL FIL (Bahr El
Ghazal)—Arab; TINTUKUKI (J. Eliri)—Nuba; BOLOGU or PIGHADI—Golo.

Tree. Leaves opp., oblong or obovate-oblong, 2-4 in. long, nerved from
base and 2 others above. Cymes few-fl. lateral; cor. white ¼ in. long,
hairy at throat. Fruit size of an orange.

Nubia; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dar Nuba on
quartz); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Gir, & Jur Ghattas, and near
Pongo River).

Fruit edible but very sour. Wood white, coarse.


=S. xerophila= _Baker._ ERG EL SAGGAT—Arab.

Small tree. Leaves opp., ovate or oblong, 3-4 in. long, 5-nerved from
base, coriaceous. Cymes few-fl., lateral, sessile; cor. white, ⅓ in.
long. Fruit size of an orange, edible.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land and Kutshuk Ali).

The burning bark is applied as a cautery to snake-bites. The root is
pounded in water for the bath in case of fever.


=S. spinosa= _Lam._

Shrub with hooked thorns from the nodes. Leaves opp., obovate or
suborbicular, 2-3 in. long, 5-nerved from near base. Cymes short, dense,
terminal; cor. greenish, small. Fruit size and colour of an orange,
edible.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, between Deims & Atem River, & Jur Ghattas).


=S. gracillima= _Gilg._

Shrub with hooked spines from the nodes. Leaves opp., ovate or oblong, 1
in. long, 3-nerved from base. Cymes dense, terminal; cor. white small.
Fruit 2 in. diam.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Deim Zubeir); Darfur Prov.
(Kulme).


=S. emarginata= _Baker._

Pubescent shrub with hooked thorns. Leaves opp., obovate, 1-2 in. long,
emarginate with small mucro, glossy, 5-nerved from base. Cymes dense,
terminal; fl. small. Fr. 2 in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. sp.=

Shrub. Leaves ovate-elliptic, acuminate, 4 in. long, 1¾ in. broad,
3-nerved, glabrous. Tendrils hook-like.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Assika River).


                               =OLEACEÆ.=


427 =Jasminum Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Scandent pubescent shrub. Leaves simple, opp., oblong, 1½-2 in. long.
Fl. 1-3 on axillary and terminal pedicels; cor. white, lobes 6-7,
lanceolate; tube 1 in. long; stamens 2 as in all this natural order. Fr.
a berry.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Wau); Mongalla Prov. (Bor & south).


=J. near J. pauciflorum= _Benth._

Shrub. Leaves opposite, simple, obovate, acuminate, 1½-2 in. long,
pubescent. Flowers solitary, terminal, white, sweet smelling. Corolla
tube ⅔ in. long, lobes 6-7, about ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=J. ternifolium= _Baker._

Shrub. Leaves simple, in whorls of 3, oblong or ovate, 1½-2 in. long.
Fl. in dense panicled flat-topped cymes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: near Sabbi).


=J. Steudneri= _Schwfth._

Pubescent shrub. Leaves opp., lower simple, upper 3-fol., leaflets
ovate. Cymes few-flowered, terminal and axillary; cor. tube ¾ in. long;
lobes 5; berry small subglobose.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit Mts. near Suakin).


=J. mauritianum= _Bojer._

Shrub. Leaves opp., 3-fol.; leaflets ovate, 2-3 in. long. Cymes terminal
and axillary, panicled at ends of branches; cor. white; tube ¾-1 in.
long; lobes 6-8. Berry small globose.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=J. floribundum= _R. Br._

Scandent shrub. Leaves opp. imparipinnate; leaflets 5, ovate. Cymes few-
flowered, terminal and axillary; cor. white, fragrant; tube ab. ¾ in.
long; lobes 5.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Red Sea Prov.

Nearly allied to the common Jasmine.


=J. officinale= _Linn._ HENDAMALAWE—Hadendowa; MILMILO—Rashida.

Scandent shrub. Leaves opp., trifoliolate; leaflets lanceolate, acute,
1-1½ in. long, glabrous; corolla tube ½ in. long; lobes ovate, acute.
Berry 2-lobed, shining.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


428 =Olea Hochstetteri= _Baker._

Tall tree. Leaves opp., simple, oblong, 3-4 in. long, minutely
cuspidate, subcoriaceous, glabrous, or nearly so beneath; petiole ½-¾
in. long. Fl. small, white in lateral and terminal racemes; cor. tube
short; lobes 4, longer than the tube; st. 2. Fr. a drupe.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Khor Tela).


=O. europæa= _Linn._ =var. nubica= _Schwfth._ ZEITUN—Arab;
DADD’A—Hadendowa.

Stunted bush with congested or thinly lepidote branches, or small tree.
Leaves orbicular or oblong, up to 2 in. long, glabrous or brownish-white
scaly beneath, opp. Fl. and fr. not seen.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Erkowit); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 9,700 ft.).

Wood hard, close grained. Considered by Schweinfurth to be the primitive
stock of the cultivated Olive tree.


=O. chrysophylla= _Lam._ WAGRI—Rashida; DADD’A Hadendowa.

Tree with slender branchlets, extremities densely lepidote. Leaves
lanceolate, 2-4 in. long, narrowed each end, glabrous above when mature,
densely rufous-lepidote beneath. Panicles axillary, sparsely compound,
1-1½ in. long; cor. ⅛ in. long. Drupe globose, ¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 8-10,000
ft.).


429 =Linociera nilotica= _Oliv._

Tall tree with a trunk 6-8 ft. in girth; branchlets glabrous, whitish.
Leaves opp., simple, entire, oblong, 2-5 in. long; petiole ab. ½ in.
Panicles lateral, 1-2 in. long; petals 4, small, nearly free; st. 2. Fr.
a drupe.

(?Upper) White Nile; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit, Bongo and
Niamniam lands); Mongalla Prov.


                             =APOCYNACEÆ.=


430 =Landolphia florida= _Benth._ ABU KHAMIR & ALGULU-AR (Blue
Nile)—Arab; SHANGYE (Dilling)—Nuba; MUNOH—Bongo; MANA—Dinka; BIH &
IVI—Golo; BIH—Indogo; APWAMAH—Jur; SUSSI—Krej.

Very large woody climber, sometimes up to 3 ft. girth, with milky sap;
tendrils long, branched. Leaves opp., simple, variable, usually elliptic
to elliptic-oblong, 3-7 in. long, dark green and glossy above. Fl. in
terminal, pubescent, dense corymbs; cor. white, with yellow throat,
5-lobed, variable in size, fragrant; st. 5, included, anthers linear-
oblong. Fruit more or less globose, citron-like, yellow, up to 4 in.
diam, pulp yellow.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Khor Koki); Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Banks
of Khors near Dilling); Upper White Nile Prov. (Upper Sobat); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

The latex yields a resinous rubber of no commercial value. Fruit
globose, acidulous, edible.

=var. leiantha= _Oliv._

Infl. more glabrous than in type.

Kassala Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=L. petersiana= _Dyer._ =var. Schweinfurthiana= _Stapf._ DUNGO—Golo.

Scandent shrub, shoots rusty-tomentose when young, the terminal infl.
acting as tendrils. Leaves opp., elliptic or elliptic-oblong, 3½-4½ in.
long, coriaceous, loosely pubescent when young. Panicle, rachis and
branches twining, the latter bearing clusters of sessile flowers; cor.
white, fragrant, lobes 5 overlapping, ½-¾ in. long, tube ¼ in. Fr.
globose, up to 2½ in. diam., finely velvety.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau to Pongo).

The latex yields an inferior rubber.


=L. owariensis= _Beauv._ =var. tomentella= _Stapf._ NGELEH—Bongo;
ODILOH—Dinka; N’DALA & VANGA—Golo; ATILOB—Jur; WAWA—Krej.

Woody climber, with forked, hooked tendrils; young parts densely fulvous
tomentose. Leaves oblong to elliptic, 2-3½ in. long. Panicles terminal
pyramidal or ovoid; cor. white, turning brownish, tube ¼ in. long; lobes
spreading or reflexed, ab. ⅙ in. long. Fr. globose 1-2½ in. diam.,
yellow mottled red, wrinkled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

Yields the best Sudan rubber. Fruit sweet, edible.


431 =Clitandra Schweinfurthii= _Stapf._ KOH—Golo & Indogo.

Climbing shrub. Leaves elliptic, acuminate, 2-3 in. long, coriaceous,
shining above; veins conspicuous, raised. Cymes few-flowered axillary;
cor. lobes white, overlapping, ¾ in. long; tube yellow, ⅓ in. Fr.
globose, 2 in. diam., reddish-brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).

Latex sticky.


432 =Carissa edulis= _Vahl._

Spinous shrub, more or less glabrous. Leaves ovate, acute, 1½-3 in.
long, ¾-1½ in. broad, glabrous. Cymes several-flowered. Corolla ½ in.
long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).

=var. tomentosa= _Stapf._ AGAM—Rashida; HARNAB—Hadendowa; SIRKUKA—Bari;
AFININ—Dinka; PELLE or TINDI—Golo; POPOGI & (the fruit) RINDICHWE—Zande.

Dense spinous shrub, spines opp., usually straight, 1-2 in. long. Leaves
opp., usually ovate to ovate-elliptic, ¾-2 in. long, coriaceous,
tomentose. Fl. in axillary or terminal clusters; cor. white or purple;
lobes overlapping, up to ⅓ in. long; tube ½-¾ in. long. Berry globose,
purple to black, ¼-½ in. diam.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has); Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.
(Gardus forest); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Sudd & Mongalla
Prov.).

The bark is used as medicine in Bahr El Ghazal Prov. The fruit is
similar to the damson plum, and is very agreeable in taste.


433 =Rauwolfia oxyphylla= _Stapf._

Tree 30-40 ft. Leaves oblanceolate, acutely acuminate, 6 in. long, 1½-2
in. broad, glabrous, with numerous lateral nerves. Cymes lax with very
small flowers. Corolla tube ⅙ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=R. vomitoria= _Afz._

Shrub or small tree, 20 ft. high, glabrous except infl.; young branches
quadrangular. Leaves in whorls of 3-4, lanceolate to elliptic, more or
less acuminate both ends, 3-7 in. long. Fl. in terminal or pseudo-
axillary, much branched, umbellate cymes; cor. white, lobes ovate,
small, tube ¼ in. long, hairy in the mouth. Fruit a simple or divaricate
twin drupe; drupes free, ovoid, subapiculate, ab. ⅓ in. long, red.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Assika River).


434 =Pleiocarpa microcarpa= _Stapf._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves ternate, oblong, 4-7 in. long, glaucous
below; petiole 4-6 in. long. Fl. in sessile axillary clusters; calyx
minute, sepals ovate, obtuse. Fr. a berry, ellipsoid or obovoid.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Mbrwole River).


435 =Alstonia congensis= _Engl._ BIRR (Bahr El Ghazal Prov.)—Dinka;
BANGI—Golo; MBADI—Zande.

Large tree. Leaves in whorls of 4-6, oblanceolate to obovate, cuneate,
4-7 in. long; nerves prominent, 30-40 on each side. Fl. white in
terminal compound, whorled panicles, each of its branches having 2-3
tiers of whorled pseudo-umbels of 4-7 fl.; cor. tube nearly ½ in. long,
lobes under ¼ in. long, contorted. Fr. of 2 follicles.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Diamvonu Stream).

The wood is light, white, and soft. It is used for making native stools,
furniture, war-drums and boats. The bark is reputed to be poisonous, but
is used in Nigeria for medicinal purposes.


436 =Voacanga obtusa= _K. Sch._

Tall tree. Leaves opp., crowded at ends of branches, obovate to oblong,
4-9 in. long. Infl. racemed or umbelled, geminate from the branch-forks;
calyx tubular, glandular; cor. white, fleshy, fragrant; tube ¾ in.;
lobes 1 in. long, up to 1½ in. broad; anthers 5 sagittate. Berry
globose, fleshy, 2 in. diam.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Mbrwole River).


=V. Schweinfurthii= _Stapf._

Glabrous shrub, 15 ft. high. Leaves opp., oblanceolate to elliptic-
lanceolate, 5-8 in. long, papery. Inflorescences in pairs from the
branch forks, few-flowered, umbelled; calyx tube subcampanulate
glandular; cor. yellow; tube ½ in. long; lobes 5, obovate-oblique, 1 in.
long. Berry ovoid, pulp yellow.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Yuru River).


=V. africana= _Stapf._

Small tree. Leaves variable, usually elliptic-oblong, 2-8 in. long,
acute both ends, subcoriaceous. Infl. axillary, corymbose, many-
flowered, peduncles often paired, nodose; calyx campanulate, glandular;
lobes 5, reflexed when ripe; cor. cream-white, fragrant, tube twisted,
under ½ in.; lobes ½-1 in. long, contorted; anthers acute, sagittate.

Mongalla Prov. (Above Bor).


437 =Conopharyngia penduliflora= _Stapf._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves opp., lanceolate to elliptic-oblong, 4-8 in.
long. Infl. racemose pseudo-axillary or terminal, pendulous, 6-8
flowered; cor. white, fragrant; tube fleshy, ½ in. long; lobes oblique;
anthers conniving into a cone, sagittate; berry globose, fleshy.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Yuru River).


=C. Holstii= _Stapf._

Tall tree; bark at first dark green, later whitish. Leaves opp., oblong
to elliptic-oblong, up to 10 in. long. Infl. corymbose; cor. white with
yellow centre; tube fleshy, up to ½ in. diam. and 1 in. long; lobes
oblong, overlapping, 1 in. or more; anthers ½ in. long, sagittate,
conniving into a cone. Berry globose, blackish-brown, 4 in. diam.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


438 =Adenium speciosum= _Fenzl._

Fleshy arborescent shrub, ab. 4 ft. high; trunk up to 2-3 ft. thick at
base. Leaves in spirals and terminal fascicles, oblanceolate or linear
oblong, often emarginate, 2-4 in. long, appearing with the flowers,
coriaceous. Fl. in paired racemes; calyx 5-lobed, ab. ⅓ in. long; cor.
carmine; tube funnel-shaped, ab. 1 in. long with 5 hairy lines inside;
lobes 5, ab. 1 in. long or shorter, spreading; anthers 5, sagittate,
conniving at the top by long hairy appendages as long as the tube. Fr. 2
spindle-shaped follicles 5-7 in. long.

Fung Prov. (J. Akaro & Fazoghli); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Hedra, Rashad);
Mongalla Prov.


=A. Hongkel= _A. DC._ SIM, SIM AHMAR or SHAGAR EL SIM (Baggara)—Arab;
DAGARAG (Tagele), NARURAI (J. Eliri) & TUMU (Kadugli)—Nuba.

Stumpy arborescent shrub, 6-10 ft. high, with fleshy stem and branches,
not unlike a miniature Baobab. Leaves appearing after the flowers,
obovate-oblong, 3-4 in. long. Cymes 2-10 flowered; cor. carmine, much as
above, somewhat smaller.

Nuba Mts. Prov (on rocks).

The juice is said to be used for poisoning arrows; hence its Arabic
name.


=A. obesum= _R._ & _S._

Arborescent shrub, 3 ft. high. Leaves oblanceolate, rounded and
mucronulate at the tip, 3-4 in. long, 1-1½ in. broad, puberulous below.
Flowers on leafless branches. Corolla tube 1¼ in. long, pubescent.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra).


                          =ASCLEPIADACEÆ.[4]=


439 =Cryptolepis oblongifolia= _Schlechter._

Erect shrub. Leaves opp. or ternate, narrowly lanceolate to oblong-
elliptic, ½-2 in. long. Cyme subaxillary, 3-16 flowered; cor. yellow,
minute. Fr. 2 spindle-shaped, spreading follicles.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. sp.=

Shrub 2-4 ft. Leaves lanceolate, acute, 1½ in. long, ⅓-⅔ in. broad,
glabrous. Fruiting carpel divergent, 3 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land to West of Tonj River).


440 =Tacazzea venosa= _Decne._ =var. Martini= _N.E. Br._

Erect or twining shrub with milky juice. Leaves opp. or whorled,
lanceolate, 2½-5 in. long, glabrous above, tomentose beneath. Panicles
axillary, 1½-4 in. long; sepals minute, broadly elliptic; cor. lobed
nearly to base; lobes oblong, ¼ in. long, overlapping; coronal lobes
linear, divided ab. half way down into 2 filiform segments. Follicles 2,
lanceolate 2-3 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=T. apiculata= _Oliv._ SHAG EL FIL, HALLEYU, ABU LEBBEN & ARKALA—Arab.

Woody twiner. Leaves opp., oblong or elliptic-oblong, 2-5 in. long,
shortly pointed at apex, emarginate or cordate at base, whitish
tomentose beneath. Panicles 2½-6 in. long; sepals minute, brick-red;
cor. lobed nearly to base; lobes ¼ in. long; coronal lobes filiform,
nearly ½ in. long. Follicles 2, horizontally diverging, lanceolate,
tapering to a point, ab. 3 in. long.

Fung. Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas,
Niamniam & Bongo-lands); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).

Yields a kind of Gutta-Percha.


=T. sp.= ARKALA—Arab.

Branches pubescent. Leaves oblong-elliptic, truncate, mucronate, 3 in.
long, 2 in. broad, whitish pubescent below. Flowers not seen.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kaka).


441 =Raphionacme jurensis= _N.E. Br._

Procumbent trailing shrub, with puberulous branches. Leaves not seen.
Flowers solitary or in pairs, grey-lilac; pedicels 3-5 in. long,
puberulous. Corolla lobes ¼ in. long, thinly pubescent outside.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Jur & Wau Rivers).


=R. sp. near R. jurensis= _N.E. Br._

Similar to above but erect from a long tuber, sometimes leafy at time of
flowering. Leaves oblanceolate, 2 in. long, subacute. Corolla whitish
green with 2 purple spots at base of each lobe; filaments purple.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor & southward).


442 =Omphalogonus calophyllus= _Baillon._

Glabrous twiner. Leaves ovate, rounded or widely cordate at the base,
acutely acuminate, 3-6 in. long, 2-4½ in. broad, with 12-14 lateral
nerves. Cymes axillary, few flowered. Calyx cupular, lobes 1/12 in.
long. Corolla lobes elliptic, ⅓ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


443 =Periploca aphylla= _Decne._ MAGOK—Hadendowa.

Shrub with short, stiff, usually leafless branches, young shoots bearing
oblong or linear-oblong leaves, ½ in. long. Cymes 5-20 flowered,
terminal; cor. ½ in. diam., rotate; lobes ¼ in. with white hairs near
margin; coronal lobes ¼ in. long, each with 2 wing-like keels; anthers
connate at tip over the style. Follicles 2 spreading, 3-4 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21°-22° L.N.).

The fibre is used in India for well-ropes, being considered impervious
to the action of water. The flower-buds are eaten raw or cooked. The
latex is applied to tumours and swellings.


=P. linearifolia= _Dill._ & _Rich._

Shrub with whip-like branches. Leaves linear, acute, about 2 in. long
and ⅙ in. broad, 1-nerved. Flowers in lax cymes. Corolla-lobes densely
ciliate on the margins.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


444 =Secamone Schweinfurthii= _K. Schum._

Climbing shrub. Leaves opp., elliptic to orbicular, ⅓-1¼ in. long. Cymes
3-6 fld., axillary and terminal; cor. under ¼ in. diam., with minute
coronal lobes. Foll. 2, spreading, glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Kulongo).


445 =Podostelma Schimperi= _K. Schum._

Small woody shrub, sometimes twining. Leaves opp., thick, ovate or
elliptic, ⅓-1 in. long. Cymes sessile, 2-6-fid.; cor. white or
yellowish; lobes ⅓ in. long, overlapping; anthers winged, connivent
round upper part of style. Foll. 2, lanceolate, 1½-2 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & Sinkat); between Suakin & Berber (Wadi
Sarranib).


446 =Glossonema lineare= _Decne._

Slender annual, 6-15 in. high. Leaves opp., linear or lin.-lanceolate,
¾-2 in. long. Fl. solitary in 1 axil of the opp. leaves; cor. lobes ¼
in. long; corona minute. Foll. 2, linear-terete.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=G. nubicum= _Decne._

Herb, 6-12 in. high, with white hairs on pet. and lower sides of leaves
which are opp., linear or linear-lanceolate, ¾-5 in. long. Fl. 2-6
together, cymose; cor. white, ⅙ in. diam.; coronal lobes ovate,
subulate. Foll. 2, 1½ in. long, echinate, lanceolate.

Khartoum Prov. (Baraka); Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon & Tueir).


=G. Boveanum= _Decne._

Herb, 3-10 in. high; stems white-hairy. Leaves opp., ovate or ovate-
lanceolate, white-pubescent. Fl. 1-3 together sublateral, white, minute;
coronal lobes 3-lobed, the middle one filiform; anther appendages
reniform. Foll. 2, spiny, 1½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin); Nubia (sea-coast to between 3,000 and 4,000
ft.).


447 =Solenostemma Argel= _Hayne._ HARGAL—Arab.

Undershrub, 1½-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., lanceolate to oblong-ovate, 1-1½
in. long, coriaceous. Cymes axillary, many-flowered, ab. 2 in. long;
cor. white, tube minute, lobes ¼ in. long; corona cup-shaped; lobes 5,
obtuse, concave-hooded. Foll. 1, 2 in. long, ¾ in. thick.

Sudan North; Kordofan Prov.

The leaves possess purgative properties.


448 =Oxystelma bornouense= _R. Br._

Slender herbaceous climber. Leaves opp. deltoid-ovate to lanceolate,
cordate or hastate, 1-3 in. long, acuminate. Cymes axillary, long-
peduncled, 2-3 fl.; cor. ab. 1 in. diam., mauve veined with purple, cup-
shaped; lobes deltoid. Foll. 1, much inflated, ab. 2 in. long, ovoid-
oblong.

Berber Prov. (Atbara: Shallalat); Blue Nile Prov. (mouth of Dinder);
Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (at Om Madeb); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-
land: Mvolo).


449 =Schizoglossum abyssinicum= _K. Schum._

Undershrub with slender whip-like stems from a woody rhizome. Leaves
linear-acicular, 1½ in. long, slightly pubescent. Flowers fasciculate;
pedicels ⅓ in. long, pubescent. Corolla-lobes linear-oblong, pubescent.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=S. angustissimum= _K. Schum._

Herb, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves opp. or whorled, linear, margins revolute,
¾-2½ in. long. Umbels 6-10 fl., numerous, sessile, lateral; cor. minute
with long woolly hairs on margins of lobes; coronal lobes with bi- or
trifid horns. Follicles 2.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Gumango hill in Niamniam-land).


=S. Petherickianum= _Oliv._

Hairy herb. Leaves opp. or whorled, oblong to ovate-lanceolate. Umbels
numerous, lateral at nodes, sessile, 10-15 fl.; cor. minute, hairy;
coronal lobe on inner face with an erect tooth and 2 decurrent keels.

Bahr El Jebel (Nyangara).


=S. eximium= _N.E. Br._

Tall herb. Leaves opp., oblong-ovate, cordate, 1½-3 in. long. Umbels
several, 6-10 fl., lateral or terminal; peduncles 1-2 in. long; cor.
white, lobes campanulate, ¾ in. long; coronal lobes purple or purple
brown, nearly ½ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=S. sp.=

Habit of _S. abyssinicum_, but pedicels much shorter and corolla-lobes
longer.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


450 =Calotropis procera= _Ait._ USHAR—Arab; BARAS—Hadendowa; OGUN or
UBUN (Dilling), LAMBŪRI (J. Eliri) & KAUROK (Kadugli)—Nuba.

Shrub or small tree; youngest parts white-tomentose. Leaves opp.,
subsessile, ovate or elliptic, 2-12 in. long, cordate, glabrous. Fl. in
lateral and terminal clusters of 3-10; cor. campanulate, ¾-1 in. diam.,
white, with purple-brown tips; coronal lobes ¼ in. long, truncate, with
2 lobes at top of each. Foll. 2, subglobose, spongy inside, 3-4 in.
long.

Throughout the greater part of the Sudan.

The latex yield an inferior Gutta-Percha. The floss from the fruit is
used for stuffing pillows. The bast fibre is strong and glossy but
difficult to extract. The leaves are used for fermenting durra in the
preparation of merissa. Almost every part of the plant is used as
medicine. The latex is an irritant poison.


451 =Kanahia laniflora= _R. Br._ ABU LEBBEN—Arab.

Riverside shrub, 4-5 ft. high. Leaves opp., lanceolate or linear-
lanceolate, 2-6 in. long, with minute bristles in axils of nerves. Fl.
on 1-2 in. long peduncles from the lateral nodes; cor. white, fragrant,
campanulate, ¾ in. long; lobes ⅓ in. densely woolly; coronal lobes 5,
fleshy with simple or bifid inflexed beaks. Foll. 2 lanceolate,
acuminate, ab. 2 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.
(Fazoghli: J. Araro); Upper White Nile Prov.


=K. glaberrima= _N.E. Br._

Shrub, 4-6 ft. high. Leaves opp., linear-lanceolate, 2-6 in. long, with
bristles in axils of nerves. Fl. in pedunculate several-flowered, umbel-
like lateral racemes; cor. white; lobes ⅓ in. long, with white woolly
hairs; coronal lobes deltoid-ovate, with linear-acuminate teeth at the
tops. Foll. usually solitary, lanceolate, beaked, ab. 2 in. long.

Khartoum Prov. (Shambat: Banks of the Nile).


452 =Asclepias lineolata= _Schlechter._

Stout undershr. with fleshy roots, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate- to
linear-oblong, 2-4½ in. long, cordate. Umbels 4-10 fl., lateral and
terminal; cor. purplish, 1 in. diam.; lobes ½ in. long, ciliolate;
coronal lobes purple, pointed, ridged between the anthers, which connive
over the style. Follicles 2, inflated ellipsoid, 3-4 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land).


=A. Schweinfurthii= _N.E. Br._

Stems 2 ft. or more. Leaves opp., lanceolate-ovate, cordate, 2-3½ in.
long. Umbels 4-6 fl., lateral on peduncles up to 6 in. long; cor.
rotate-campanulate, 1 in. diam.; lobes ½ in. long, fringed on one
margin; corona ¼ in. long, winged. Foll. 2.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=A. semilunata= _N.E. Br._

Stems 2-5 ft. high. Leaves whorled below, opp. above, linear or
lin.-lanceolate, 4-7 in. long. Umbels lateral on 1 in. long peduncles;
cor. lobes ⅓-½ in. long, reflexed; corona toothed. Foll. half-moon
shaped, 2½-3 in. long, inflated, echinate.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Wando).


=A. flavida= _N.E. Br._

White-tomentose shrub, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves opp., linear, 1½-3 in. long.
Umbels 4-6 fl., lateral. Cor. white (?), lobes reflexed, ¼ in. long,
fringed on one margin; corona dull purple. Foll. ellipsoid, bristly when
young.

Red Sea Prov. (coast, 21° N.L.).


=A. macrantha= _Hochst._

Stem 9-18 in. high. Leaves opp., lin.-lanceolate, acuminate, 3-10 in.
long. Umbels 3-6 fl., lateral and terminal on peduncle 3-11 in. long;
cor. scarlet or yellow, rotate; lobes ½ in. long; corona yellow. Foll.
usually solitary, lanceolate, 3-4 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Ibba River); Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River).


=A. Phillipsiæ= _N.E. Br._

Woody, densely pubescent shrub. Leaves opp., linear, 1½-3½ in. long,
margins very revolute. Umbels lateral, 3-6 fl.; peduncle ½-¾ in. long;
cor. white, deeply-lobed; lobes ¼ in. long, reflexed, fringed on one
margin; corona with 5 falcate teeth. 2 Foll., 2 in. long, lanceolate.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 7,200-9,000 ft.).


453 =Margaretta rosea= _Oliv._

Perennial herb, 12-18 in. high. Leaves opp., linear to lanceolate,
acuminate, 2-5 in. long. Umbels 3-4 in a corymb at top of the stem, and
sometimes one from the node below, each 7-16 fl., on peduncles ½-3 in.
long; cor. lobes ⅙ in. long, erect; corona toothed. Foll. often
solitary, ab. 3 in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


454 =Cynanchum polyanthum= _K. Schum._

Pubescent, fleshy twiner. Leaves opp., ovate, acute, cordate, 2-3½ in.
long; petiole 1-2 in. long. Umbels 10-30 fl., compound, peduncle 1-1½
in. long; cor. lobes ¼ in. long; corona tubular half its length and with
5 entire or bifid teeth. Follicles 2 in. long, glabrous.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


455 =Sarcostemma viminale= _R. Br._

Succulent, almost leafless shrub with switch-like, sometimes twining
shoots. Umbels many-flowered, lateral or terminal, sessile. Fl. small,
greenish-white or yellow; corona double, minute. Foll. 2.,
lin.-lanceolate, 2½-4 in. long.

Nubia (Wadi Tui between Suakin & Berber); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).


456 =Pentatropis cynanchoides= _R. Br._

Slender twiner. Leaves opp., oblong to ovate, ½-1½ in. long, fleshy.
Umbels 3-6 fl., subaxillary; cor. purplish-green, 5-lobed; lobes linear
from triangular base; corona with acute apex. 2 Foll., lanceolate,
beaked 2-3 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (J. Waratab near Suakin & Karora hills); White Nile Prov.;
Upper White Nile Prov. (Barboi).


457 =Dæmia cordata= _R. Br._

Slender woody climber. Leaves opp., ovate to orbicular, cordate,
tomentose on both sides, ½ to 1 in. long. Fl. in a corymb-like raceme,
1-2 in. long; cor. small, green; corona double. 2 Follicles 1½-2½ in.
long, ovoid, beaked, echinate.

Nubian Coast; Kassala Prov. (Atbara: Goz Regeb on granite); Nuba Mts.
Prov.


=D. extensa= _R. Br._

Differs from above by more glabrous and larger (up to 5 in. long) leaves
and also large raceme, 2-16 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba Mountains to near Karora); Blue Nile Prov.;
Kordofan, Darfur, Upper White Nile (Renk), & Mongalla Provinces.

The stems yield a fibre. The plant is used in infantile diarrhœa, also
as an emetic. The pulp of the fleshy leaves is used as a stimulating
poultice for carbuncles.


458 =Gymnema sylvestre= _R. Br._

Woody twiner. Leaves opp., ovate to lanceolate, cuneate or cordate at
base, ¾-3 in. long. Umbels subaxillary, many-flowered; cor. yellowish-
white, minute, fleshy; coronal lobes fleshy, fringed. Follicles 2½-3½
in. long, lanceolate, beaked.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Jur Ghattas, Dar Fertit, Biri River).

The root is used for snake bite. The leaves, when chewed, are said to
destroy the taste of sugar for twenty-four hours.


459 =Marsdenia spissa= _S. Moore._ SHAGAR EL FIL (Fung)—Arab.

Woody climber. Leaves opp., ovate or elliptic-ovate acuminate 1½-4 in.
long. Cymes many-flowered, lateral; cor. greenish-yellow, rotate-
campanulate, ½ in. diam.; lobes ¼ in. long, tomentose; coronal lobes
minute, fleshy. Follicles 3½ in. long, elongate-ovoid, with broad frill-
like wings; seeds crowned with long silky hairs.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau, Jur).

Yields a fibre.


=M. rubicunda= _N.E. Br._ KNĀR (Kenissa)—Dinka.

Woody climber, young parts with salmon-red tomentum. Leaves opp.,
elliptic or elliptic-ovate, cordate, 1-3 in. long. Cor. ½ in. diam.;
lobes rotate, 1/5 in. long, greenish; corona lobes subulate and bifid.
Follicles 2, wings 4, crenate.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dar Nuba); Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé
and Meshra El Rek); Mongalla Prov.


460 =Leptadenia lancifolia= _Decne._ ERG HABŪB EL KHEIL, or ABU LEBBEN
or UMLEBEINA or MABLEBEN (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Woody, tomentose climber. Leaves opp., ovate to lanceolate or variable
in shape, 1-5 in. long. Umbels many-flowered, lateral; cor. green,
rotate, lobes under ¼ in. long; throat densely bearded with white hairs;
coronal lobes fleshy, pointed. Follicles 2, lanceolate, 3-4 in. long,
glabrous.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile Prov. & Upper Nile Prov. (Dueim to
Kodok); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Gadein); Bahr El Jebel (up
to Lake Albert).

The pounded roots, mixed with water are said to be given to horses and
cattle for flatulency.


=L. heterophylla= _Decne._ LUWEIS—Arab; ASHENON (Kenissa)—Dinka.

Slender woody twiner. Leaves very variable from linear-hastate to oval,
¾-3 in. long. Umbels several-flowered, sub-axillary; cor. 2-2½ lines in
diam.; corona lobes fleshy, tipped with hairs. Foll. 1, lanceolate, 2-3
in. long.

Fung Prov. northwards; Darfur Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).


=L. Spartium= _Wight._ MARAKH or MERAKH & ZA’ANSHERAB ELMI (N.
Kordn.)—Arab; AGWAIT—Hadendowa.

Switch-like, green-stemmed, glaucous shrub, 5-10 ft. high, generally
leafless. Umbels subaxillary, flowers developing successively; cor.
yellow, 5-lobed, small; corona green, fleshy. Foll. 2, lin.-lanceolate,
terete, 3-4 in. long.

North Sudan; Red Sea, Kassala & Kordofan Provinces.

Yields a valuable fibre but difficult of extraction. Good camel fodder.


461 =Ceropegia nilotica= _Kotschy._

Slender fleshy twiner with tuberous root. Leaves opp., ovate-lanceolate,
acuminate, toothed towards apex, 1 in. long. Peduncles lateral, 2
flowered; cor. blackish-purple, yellow in throat, 1½ in. long; tube
inflated at base; lobes connate at apex, ¼ in. long; corona double,
inner yellowish.

Mongalla Prov. (Bari-land, Gondokoro).


=C. racemosa= _N.E. Br._

Slender twiner. Leaves opp., lanceolate or oblong-lanceolate, 1-2 in.
long. Flowers solitary, ⅓-1 in. apart on racemes, which are 2-4 in.
long; cor. tube ¾ in. long, hairy inside; lobes ½ in. long, connate at
apex, fringed; corona ciliate, double, 5 outer with 10 teeth ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Jur Ghattas).


=C. stenantha= _K. Schum._ AKEISH or AGASH (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; AKON
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka; AGE (Meshra El Zeraf)—Shilluk.

Slender twiner. Leaves opp., lanceolate, 1-2½ in. long, ciliolate on
margin. Cymes 3-6 fl., umbelled, sublateral; cor. greenish; tube ½ in.
inflated below; lobes ½ in. linear, connate at tips; corona double,
minute.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-
land, Jur Ghattas).

The leaves are acid and can be eaten as spinach. The tuber is said to be
a good substitute for a potato.


462 =Brachystelma phyteumoides= _K. Schum._

Dwarf perennial; several stems, ab. 4 in. high, from a thick root stock.
Leaves opp. linear, acuminate, ab. 2 in. long, nearly glabrous. Umbel
terminal between a pair of leaves; cor. dark purple-brown; tubes short,
lobes ¾ in. long; corona included in tube, very short, outer lobes
bifid. Foll. fusiform.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land; near Jur Ghattas).


463 =Echidnopsis nubica= _N.E. Br._

Leafless, succulent, obtusely 8-angled plant, angles tesselately divided
into obtuse tubercles. Fl. fascicled near tips of the stems; cor. very
small, 5-lobed, purple-brown, or purple-brown dotted on green; corona
single. Follicles up to 4 in. long and ⅓ in. thick, purplish.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Suakin).


464 =Caralluma longidens= _N.E. Br._

Succulent branching 4-angled plant; branches attenuated upwards, 5-8 in.
long; angles slightly toothed; teeth bearing fleshy, terete, deciduous
leaves. Fl. solitary or 2 together along upper part of stem; cor. dark
purple-brown; tube ¼-⅓ in. long; lobes ¼ in., ovate-lanceolate,
glabrous; outer corona of 10 lin.-subulate teeth, ⅙ in. long, inner with
5 smaller teeth.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Laemeb).


=C. vittata= _N.E. Br._

Succulent, glabrous, 4-angled plant, 6-8 in. high; angles slightly
toothed; branches ⅓ to 1 in. thick, much attenuated upwards. Fl. 1-4
together, scattered on the terminal 2-4 in. of the branches; cor. tube
whitish, streaked dark purple, ab. 1/7 in.; lobes ⅙ in. long, dark
purple, glabrous; outer corona of 10 minute teeth.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L. between sea level and 4,000 ft.).


=C. retrospiciens= _N.E. Br._ KAREIB—Hadendowa.

Succulent cactus-like plant, up to 3 ft. high, with ascending deeply
4-angled toothed branches, teeth broad, decurved. Umbels terminal or
subterminal, several together forming a compound globose head up to 3 or
4 in. diam. Cor. 5-lobed, deep purplish-brown, tube ¼ in. long; lobes ¼
in., deltoid, fringed with dark hairs; outer corona with 5 pairs of
teeth. Foll. ab. 6 in. long, linear, terete.

Kassala Prov. to Red Sea Prov.


465 =Huernia macrocarpa= _N.E. Br._

Succulent perennial; stems 3-4 in. high, subquadrangular, angles
coarsely toothed, teeth fleshy, recurved spinescent at apex. Follicles
in pairs, 5-6 in. long, narrow, acute or hooked at apex.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land; Abu Gurun).


                              =RUBIACEÆ.=


466 =Sarcocephalus esculentus= _Afzel._ KARMUDODA—Arab; DOMA—Zande.

Small tree. Leaves opposite, ovate-oblong, cordate, ab. 6 in. long,
almost mucronate; stipules interpetiolar, as in many of this family,
caducous, ovate, short. Flower heads orange-coloured, globose, crowded;
pistils exserted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

Yields a gum. The core of the flower-heads is eaten. Wood light yellow
with darker markings, density 0.676. A yellow dye is obtained from the
roots.


=S. Russeggeri= _Kotschy._ KARMUDOD’A (Baggara)—Arab; N’DU—Golo; DAMMA
or DOMA—Zande.

Shrub, up to 20 ft. high. Flower-heads white, sweet-scented, globose.
Leaves usually broadly elliptical.

Fung Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Korarak); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land,
Niamniam-land).

The core of the flower-heads is eaten, but in excess acts as an emetic.
The wood, which is of a red colour, is used by the Niamniams for the
manufacture of curious oracles, consisting of two pieces of wood,
flattened and polished, which may or may not adhere together after being
wetted. The root is said to be a fine bitter tonic.


467 =Adina microcephala= _Hiern._ MISTIKA or MISHKA (Medani, Fung
Prov.)—Arab.

Moderate-sized tree. Leaves lanceolate, in whorls of 4, 4-6 in. long.
Flowers compact on a globose, bracteolate receptacle. Seeds winged at
each end.

Fung Prov. (Singa & Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


468 =Mitragyne macrophylla= _Hiern._

Moderate-sized tree. Leaves elliptical, often broadly so. Flowering
heads globose, cymosely arranged or umbellate. Fruit dicoccous; seeds
winged both ends.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land & Jur-land).

The wood is used for making canoes, furniture and for housebuilding on
the West Coast.


=M. africana= _Korth._ YO?—Arab; ANGOTO—Dinka; N’DUNGO—Golo; BIAMA—Jur;
LAO—Nuer; KOFOKOFO—Zande?

Moderate-sized to fairly large tree, growing not far from water. Leaves
ovate-elliptical, more or less cordate. Flower-heads globose, solitary,
1 in. diam.; cor. white, turning yellow. Seeds 2-winged.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (mouth of Bahr El Arab & Wau).

Wood white, rather soft, density 0.560, used for carving and in cabinet
work; known as African Lime.


469 =Hymenodictyon Kurria= _Hochst._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves obovate to oval, 3-8 in. long. opposite;
interpet. stipules ovate-oblong, ½ in. long, deciduous. Inflorescence
spicate, 7 in. long. Bracts opposite, elliptical, marcescent, ab. 2 in.
long on 1 in. long stalks.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: summit of Mt. Baginse).


=H. scabrum= _Stapf._

A small scabrid shrub. Leaves obovate, 3 in. long, 1½ in. broad, scabrid
on the nerves below. Flowers not seen. Fruits narrowly ellipsoid, ¾ in.
long, prominently lenticellate. Bahr El Jebel (Bari & Madi).


470 =Crossopteryx Kotschyana= _Fenzl._ DARITAR—Dinka; M’BILI or
TIRI—Golo; AKOS—Jur.

Small tree. Leaves coriaceous, elliptical, 1-8 in. long; stip. deltoid,
acuminate. Flowers cream-coloured or pink, fragrant, in dense corymbose
panicles. Capsule 2-celled, globose, crustaceous, ab. ¼ in. diam.; seeds
peltate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur, Niamniam & Bongo lands); Uganda (Nile Prov.).


471 =Pentas carnea= _Benth._

Shrubby, 1-2 ft. high, harshly pallid-puberulous. Leaves ovate-oblong to
lanceolate-oblong, 1-6 in. long; stip. multipartite, subulate. Cymes
usually dense, 1-3 in. in diameter. Cor. purplish, hairy at throat.
Capsule 2-celled, coriaceous, many seeded.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=P. arvensis= _Hiern._

Rambling perennial, 2 ft. high. Leaves subsessile, elliptic-lanceolate.
Cymes 1-3 in. across; cor. white with purple throat, which is hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land).


=P. Schweinfurthii= _Scott Elliot._

Herb. Leaves ovate-elliptic, acute, 4½ in. long, 2 in. broad, with
numerous densely pubescent lateral nerves. Flowers light mauve, in
paniculate clusters.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


472 =Otomeria madiensis= _Oliv._

Somewhat shrubby perennial, up to ab. 3 ft. high, hairy. Interpet.
stipules sheathing, each with 3 subulate teeth. Leaves elliptical, hairy
on veins, opposite. Spikes terminal, simple or branched, 1 ft. long;
flowers 1 in. long, pink; cor. tube hairy. Capsule ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


473 =Oldenlandia grandiflora= _Hiern._

Herb, up to 4 ft. high. Flowers crimson, mostly tetramerous in this
genus, corymbose; cor. salver-shaped. Fruit subglobose, crowned with
calyx teeth. Leaves opposite, upper sometimes needle-shaped, lower
narrow-lanceolate; stipules sheathing, short, 2-3 pointed.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post);
Kordofan Prov. (Obeid & Um Sutt); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dilling); Darfur
Prov. (Kulme).


=O. senegalensis= _Hiern._

Herb, up to 3 ft. high. Flowers white or pink, paniculately cymose; cor.
salver-shaped, tube slender, glabrous. Leaves narrow-lanceolate. Fruit
as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Red Sea Prov. (Soturba); Khartoum Prov.; Fung
Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid); Mongalla Prov. (Bari-country).


=O. Schimperi= _T. Anders._

Annual, 1-3 ft. high, glandular-scabrous; branches virgate. Leaves
linear; stipules 1-3 pointed. Flowers in terminal corymbose cymes; cor.
salver-shaped, tube much longer than calyx. Capsule subglobose.

Red Sea Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=O. virgata= _DC._

Switch-like herb, 2 in. to 2 ft. high. Leaves linear, curled margins;
stipules with 2-3 bristly points. Flowers panicled; cor. cylindrical or
salver-shape. Fruit sub-globose.

Kordofan Prov. (Tueir); Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.


=O. Welwitschii= _Hiern._

Small herb with white tubular, cruciform flowers.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Dongonab).


=O. strumosa= _Hiern._

Herb, up to 18 in. high. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Cymes corymbose,
terminal; cor. salver-shaped, tube much longer than calyx. Fruit
subglobose.

Blue Nile Prov. (Upper); Kordofan Prov.


=O. lancifolia= _Schwfth._

Herb with linear-lanceolate leaves. Flowers small, axillary, solitary;
cor. not longer than calyx. Capsule furrowed, compressed-globose.

Blue Nile Prov. (near Lakanda); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El
Jebel (Madi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=O. macrophylla= _DC._

Aquatic or marsh herb. Leaves sessile, linear-lanceolate, up to 3 in.
long. Flowers white or pale blue, pentamerous, in racemose or panicled
cymes. Capsule minute.

Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land);
Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=O. trinervia= _Retz._

Weak, slightly hairy annual. Leaves broadly ovate or rotundate, tapering
to 3-nerved base. Flowers in small clusters on short peduncles,
tetramerous; cor. length of the calyx. Capsule hirsute, globose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=O. corymbosa= _Linn._

Erect or ascending annual, up to 1 ft. high. Leaves sessile, linear, or
apiculate. Stipules short, pectinate. Flowers usually in pairs, on
filiform peduncles. Corolla white.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Bongo lands, Shambé); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).

A decoction of the root is used in bilious fevers.


=O. octodon= _A. Rich._

Low, straggly herb. Leaves linear, acute, about ½ in. long, Flowers very
small, clustered and sessile at the nodes. Calyx lobes setose.

Nubia; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau &
Nianniam-land).


=O. capensis= _Linn._

Herb, 4-9 in. high; branches 4-angled. Leaves narrow-linear, revolute.
Peduncles 2 to several together, 1-flowered, axillary or terminal; cor.
white, slightly longer than calyx. Capsule minute, 4-ribbed.

Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=O. wauensis= _Schwfth._

Glabrous herb, 1 ft. high; branches with 4 raised lines. Leaves linear;
stipules sheathing, with many bristles. Flowers mostly pentamerous, in
pairs, small. Capsule coriaceous, oblong, small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau River).


=O. Heynei= _Oliv._

Herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves linear-lanceolate. Lower flowers solitary,
upper in a paniculate cyme. Cor. salver-shaped; tube slender, glabrous
within, twice the length of calyx. Fruit subglobose.

Fung Prov. (Roseires); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas
& Niamniam-land).


=O. effusa= _Oliv._

Tall herb. Leaves narrow-linear, revolute. Flowers 4-merous, lilac, in
paniculate cymes. Fruit globose.

Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa).


=O. cf. O. effusa= _Oliv._

Almost leafless herb with weak branches. Flowers pale red outside;
corolla very slender, ¾ in. long, with 4 linear very acute lobes, fruits
1/10 in. long.

Kordofan Prov. (Um Dam, 1,245 S.G.H.).


=O. sp.=

Leafy much-branched herb. Leaves linear-oblanceolate acute, 1½ in. long,
shortly pubescent. Corolla ¼ in. long, with 4 short obtuse lobes.

Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé, 1,648 S.G.H.).


=O. noctiflora= _Hiern._

Glabrous annual. Leaves linear. Flowers white, opening at night.

Red Sea Prov.


=O. hedyotoides= _Boiss._

Herb, 6 in. to 1 ft. high. Leaves linear-oval. Flowers minute, clustered
in axils of the leaves; cor. white. Capsule coriaceous, 4-ribbed.

Blue Nile, Kordofan & Bahr El Ghazal Provinces.


=O. dolichantha= _Stapf._

Slender herb with subsimple stems. Leaves lanceolate, acute, sessile,
about 1¾ in. long, glabrous. Flowers white, sweet-scented. Corolla very
long, up to 5 in. long, very slender.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


474 =Mussænda luteola= _Del._

Shrub. One lobe of calyx enlarged into a yellow leaf. Cor. 5-lobed,
yellow, fragrant.

Fung Prov. (Singa); White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land:
near M’volo & Niamniam-land); Upper Sobat; Mongalla Prov. (south of
Gondokoro); Lake Rudolf.


=M. arcuata= _Poir._

Climbing shrub. One lobe of calyx enlarged into a white leaf. Cor.
5-lobed, yellow with purplish or orange, hairy throat.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Niamniam & Bongo lands); Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River District).


=M. erythrophylla= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Shrub or climber. One lobe of calyx enlarged into a red leaf. Cor. white
or yellowish, tube densely reddish-hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).

A handsome decorative plant.


475 =Anthospermum pachyrrhizum= _Hiern._

Heath-like undershrub with fascicled, scabrid, linear leaves, ⅔ in.
long; stipules subulate. Calyx minute, 1-2 lobes enlarged, leaf-like.
Cor. funnel-shaped, 4-lobed. Fruit obovoid, dicoccous.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 8,200 ft.).


476 =Stipularia elliptica= _Schwfth._

Small, somewhat cottony shrub. Leaves elliptical, apiculate, wedge-
shaped or obtuse at base. Flowers white in solitary axillary heads
enclosed in 1 or 2 red or purple bracts.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).


477 =Tarenna nilotica= _Hiern._

Shrub, 20 ft. high. Leaves oval or obovate, papery. Flowers ½ in. long,
white, 5-merous, in dense sessile corymbs; cor. salver-shaped. Berry
globular.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


478 =Randia nilotica= _Stapf._ KHARUM or TAKIRNI (Baggara), ABU MARFEIN
(Bahr El Ghazal), SIMEIN & SHIDR EL MARFEIN (Baggara), UMKALOL,
UMSHALALO & YAU (Jongol’s Post)—Arab; UMDAMUN (Dilling) & RŪT
(Tagele)—Nuba; KULUJI—Bari; AGHEI (Goz El Siada)—Dinka; DIG—Burun.

Stiff, spinous shrub; spines opposite or alternate. Leaves usually
obovate, cuneate at base, 3 in. long. Flowers usually creamy white,
sometimes orange or greenish-yellow, solitary or few together, almost
axillary or on short lateral shoots, pentamerous. Fruit subglobose,
crowned by calyx lobes, up to 1½ in. long.

Fung, Kordofan, Upper White Nile (Goz El Siada), Bahr El Ghazal &
Mongalla Provinces.

The fruit is said to act as a fish poison and as an antidote to arrow
poison. It is a useful emetic.


=R. genipæflora= _DC._

Straggling shrub to small tree, unarmed. Leaves oval or oblong, thin in
texture, cuneate at base up to 6 in. long. Flowers white, stellate, ¾
in. long, in short dense axillary cymes. Fruit globose, ⅓ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


=R. sp.= KIRKIR (Baggara) & SOGHEIT (Fung)—Arab; MAINTU (Dilling & J.
Ghulfan) & TINTURING (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Tall shrub or small tree with large light green leaves and fruit size of
a small orange. Flowers not seen.

Fung Prov. (Roseires, edges of Khors); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dar Nuba).

By the Nubas the fruit is said to be edible.


=R. malleifera= _Benth._ BIRKWA—Jur; BLIPPO—Zande.

Ornamental puberulous shrub, 8-15 ft. high. Leaves obovate-oblong,
acuminate, opposite or apparently 3 together at end of twigs by
suppression of the node, the solitary pendulous flower replacing the
missing leaf. Corolla tawny hairy outside, white inside; tube 3 in.
long, slender; lobes ab. 2-3 in. in diam., fragrant. Fruit globose,
obscurely ribbed, 1½ in. across, crowned by calyx lobes; style long,
clapper-shaped.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shady Khors).

Yields a black sap with which the Niamniams paint their bodies.


=R. sp.=

Large shrub, no flowers seen; branchlets tomentose. Leaves ovate-
orbicular, softly pubescent on the nerves beneath, about 3 in. broad.
Young fruits ellipsoid, glabrous.

Mongalla Prov. (Kagi Ko, Yei River, Sillitoe 333).


=R. macrantha= _DC._

Climbing shrub. Leaves oval or obovate-oblong, deciduous, crowded at
ends of branches. Flowers solitary, pentamerous, fragrant. Cor. green
and white; tube slender; limb 2½ in. diam.; style long. Fruit globose or
pear-shaped, 1½ in. diam.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


479 =Morelia senegalensis= _A. Rich._ KUUM—Dinka; MUNDONGO or
YAMALA—Golo; BAKIWE—Zande.

Large shrub to small tree. Leaves oval or oblong, 2-7 in. long. Flowers
up to ½ in. long, white, fragrant, clustered in axillary cymes. Fruit
globose, ½ in. diam., green.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (watercourses).

The straight stems are used for lance-shafts.


480 =Gardenia Jovis-Tonantis= _Welw._ BAGGIS—Arab; MAMELE-BA—Bongo;
CHII—Golo; AKANJA—Jur.

Shrub. Leaves ternate, oval or obovate. Flowers solitary, terminal,
aromatic, yellowish, 6-11-merous, 1-3 in. across. Fruit more or less
spindle-shaped, when ripe subtranslucent, yellow.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Moru territory, near Ayi River).

Shrub very similar to _G. lutea_, very ornamental. Fruit is edible and
tastes like an inferior apple.


=G. Aqualla= _Stapf_ & _Hutchinson._

Shrub, 4-7 ft. high. Leaves crowded at the ends of the branches,
elongate-obovate, about 6 in. long, scabrid above, pubescent below.
Flowers white, at length yellow; corolla appressed-tomentose. Fruit
ellipsoid, beaked, ribbed, 1½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=G. erubescens= _Stapf_ & _Hutchinson_ (= =G. Tinneæ= _Vig._).

Tree, 15-20 ft.; branchlets softly tomentose. Leaves verticillate,
broadly obovate, glabrous, 4-6 in. long, often reddish, Flowers yellow;
corolla sparingly pubescent. Fruit edible.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land, near Reggo).


=G. lutea= _Fresen._ ABBAKA, ABU GAWI & BAGGIS—Arab; MAGAL (J.
Daier)—Nuba; KUGO—Bongo; DAUNG (Bahr El Ghazal) & DONG (or ADONG)
(Mongalla) & DUNK—Dinka; DUFITI—Bari; AKLIMBO or CHII—Golo; RUNDA—Hameg;
ADWANG—Jur; M’BEGGE—Zande.

Shrub, often spiny, the spines formed by abortive branches. Leaves oval
or obovate, up to 6 in. long, opposite or 3-4 together. Flowers
solitary, terminal, 6-10-merous; calyx often spathaceous, slit on one
side; cor. white or yellow, lobes up to 1½ in. long, contorted. Fruit
ovoid or globose, up to 4 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur & Niamniam-lands); South of Lat. 13° N.

The roots, boiled with Dura flour are taken by the natives as a cure for
Blackwater fever. Wood hard, dense, even-grained, light-yellow, used for
knife handles. Yields a fragrant resin called ABU BEKA by Arabs. The
fruit is a fish-poison.


=G. Vogelii= _Hook. f._ BIANGA—Zande.

Shrub to small tree. Leaves dark-green, oval or obovate, up to 10 in.
long, opposite. Flowers solitary, terminal, white, fragrant, 5-merous,
ab. 6 in. long. Fruit spindle-shaped.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Niamniam-land).

The fruit yields a blue-black dye, used by the Azande for staining their
faces.


=G. urcelliformis= _Schwfth._

Shrubby. Leaves opposite or ternate, elliptical, 3-5 in. long. Flowers
solitary, terminal; ovary urn-shaped. Fruit ovoid, 2 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


481 =Amaralia heinsioides= _Wernham._

Scandent shrub. Leaves broadly elliptic, subcordate at the base, 7-8 in.
long, about 4 in. broad, thin, glabrous. Corolla bell-shaped, tubular at
the base, white outside; lobes rose, tomentose outside. Berry red.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Diamvonu River).


=A. bignoniæflora= _Welw._

Scandent shrub or tree. Leaves evergreen, opposite, oval, up to 9 in.
long. Flowers axillary, solitary or geminate, under 3 in. long; cor.
white outside and purple inside, or orange blotched with purple. Fruit
oblong, 4 in. long, red.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


482 =Macrosphyra longistyla= _Hook. f._

Scandent, tawny, hairy shrub. Leaves opposite, hirsute, oval, ovate or
obovate, up to 7 in. long, deciduous. Flowers 2-3 in. long with style
exserted by as much again, subsessile and clustered at extremities of
branches. Cor. cream-coloured; style green. Berry pear-shaped or
globose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


483 =Oxyanthus formosus= _Hook. f._

Glabrous shrub, 10 ft. high. Leaves oval-oblong, subauriculate, 8-11 in.
long. Fl. 5-8 in. long, white, in axillary ebracteolate panicles, not
longer than the leaves.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=O. unilocularis= _Hiern._

Shrub or small tree. Leaves oblong, auriculate-cordate, 10-20 in. long.
Flowers 4-6 in. long, white, in branched axillary panicles shorter than
leaves. Fruit globose, 1 in. in diam., crowned with persistent calyx
limb, 1-celled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Khors near Deim Zubeir).


=O. macrophyllus= _Schwfth._

Tree, 50-60 ft. high. Leaves oval or ovate-oblong, subauriculate, 12-16
in. long. Flowers 6 in. long, white, in dense axillary panicles. Fruit
globose, fleshy, 2-celled with 1 seed in each cell.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land, Jur-land).


484 =Feretia apodanthera= _Del._

Shrub, 10 ft. high. Leaves opp., oval, papery, 1½ in. long. Flowers
white, ¾ in. long, subsessile, clustered on short lateral shoots;
anthers sessile at the mouth of the corolla. Fruit ¼ in. in diameter.

Kassala Prov. (Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Bongo-land & Dar Fertit; between Wau & Deim Zubeir).

The fruit can be used as a substitute for coffee (fide A. Rich).


485 =Tricalysia niamniamensis= _Schwfth._

Puberulous shrub with straight branches. Stipules intrapetiolar, broad-
deltoid, apiculate, connate. Leaves elliptical or lanceolate, narrowed
to base, with tufts of hairs on axils of veins, up to 3½ in. long.
Flowers 3-10 together, ⅓ in. long, subsessile, axillary. Berry
pubescent, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Niamniam-land); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=T. djurensis= _Hiern._

Puberulous shrub. Differs from above by leaves being rounded or slightly
hollowed at the base. Cor. greenish. Fruit 1-seeded, red.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=T. okelensis= _Hiern._

Shrub, 20 ft. high. Leaves elliptical or lanceolate, papery. Flowers in
axillary clusters, 5-7-merous; style somewhat hairy above, 2-3-cleft.
Berry ¼ in. diam., at first yellow, then red.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Khor Okel).


486 =Guettarda sp.=

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


487 =Pentanisia Schweinfurthii= _Hiern._

Dwarf herb, 3-6 in. high. Leaves oval or oblong, obtuse; stipules 2-3
cuspidate. Flowers ½ in. long, lilac, sessile, in branched heads. Fruit
subglobose, puberulous, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


488 =Cremaspora africana= _Benth._

Pubescent subscandent shrub, with supra-axillary spreading branches.
Leaves dimorphous, oval to oblong, 4 in. long, acuminate, or below the
base of the branchlets auricled, subreniform, up to 1½ in. in diam.
Flowers 5-merous, white, fragrant, under ½ in. long, subsessile, 2-6 in
short axillary clusters.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Khor Tela, Bongo, Niamniam & Jur lands); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).

Fruits yield a blue colour like Indigo.


489 =Polysphæria parvifolia= _Hiern._

Shrub, 7 ft. high, with supra-axillary branchlets. Leaves dimorphous,
oval to ovate, rounded or subcordate at base, or below the branchlets
suborbicular and cordate. Flowers small, 4-merous, axillary, 3-5
together in sessile clusters. Berry ¼ in. in diam.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat).


=P. Schweinfurthii= _Hiern._

Much branched shrub, 20 ft. high. Leaves oblong-ovate, rounded or
subcordate at base, up to 4 in. long. Calyx persistent, 4-toothed.
Berries 1-2 together, ¼ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Malgo Stream).


490 =Canthium zanzibaricum= _Klotzsch._

Unarmed shrub, sometimes scandent; branches at first green, turning
white. Leaves coriaceous, oval to ovate, obtusely acuminate, rather
unequal, under 5 in. long. Flowers minute, white, in dense axillary
panicles. Fruit 2-lobed, ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam and Bongo lands).


=C. polycarpum= _Schwfth._

Tree, 40 ft. high, in habit not unlike a tree-fern. Leaves oval,
acuminate, papery. Fruits numerous, 2-lobed, ¼ in. long, wrinkled; seeds
horse-shoe shaped. Panicle sub-globose, axillary, 2-3 in long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. venosum= _Oliv._

Unarmed shrub, tree or climber; young parts rusty-hispid. Branches ashy;
leaves oval-ovate to lanceolate, subcoriaceous, with hairy depressions
in axils of veins, up to 5 in. long. Flowers minute, white, axillary, in
globose panicles, 1 in. in diam. Fruit globose, hard, ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo & Jur lands and near Badari’s); Bahr El
Jebel (Madi).


=C. crassum= _Schwfth._

Unarmed shrub, 5-15 ft. high; bark corky-white. Leaves subcoriaceous,
obovate or oval, 6-9 in. long, opposite. Flowers 4-5-merous, ¼ in. long,
in lateral and axillary panicles, below the young leaves.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Mittu lands).


=C. nitens= _Hiern._

Glossy, unarmed shrub; branches ashy, thickened at nodes. Leaves
coriaceous, shining, oval acuminate, up to 4 in. long. Flowers axillary,
numerous, umbellate. Fruit obovoid-oblong, under ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=C. Schimperianum= _A. Rich._

Nearly glabrous arborescent shrub. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, cuneate
at base, subcoriaceous, glossy above, up to 2½ in. long. Flowers small,
yellow, axillary, umbellate. Fruit ¼ in. long, obscurely wrinkled.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


491 =Vangueria venosa= _Hochst._

Large shrub or small tree. Leaves opp., deciduous, elliptical, narrowed
to both ends, glabrous. Fl. greenish, in lax lateral and axillary
panicles, 1-2 in. in diam. Fruit subglobose, 4-5 sided, 1 in. in diam.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo & Jur lands).

Fruit is eaten.


=V. abyssinica= _A. Rich._

Unarmed shrub or small tree. Leaves elliptical, velvety, 2-5 in. long;
stipules caudate, from a broad connate base. Fl. small, yellowish-green,
in branched panicles, 1 in. in diam.; cor. velvety outside. Fruit
subglobose, 4-5 channelled.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli and Abu Sugra on the left bank of the Blue Nile).


=V. apiculata= _K. Schum._

Scandent shrub. Leaves ovate, gradually acuminate, 3 in. long, 1-1½ in.
broad, glabrous. Cymes axillary, very shortly pedunculate; pedicels
softly tomentose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


492 =Meyna tetraphylla= _Robyns._

Subscandent puberulous shrub, 20 ft. high, with opposite spinous
branches; spines ½-1 in. long, decussate or opposite a spine-like
branchlet. Leaves crowded on short shoots, pseudo-verticillate in fours,
oval, chartaceous. Fl. in short axillary clusters on hairy stalks,
4-5-merous, very small; cor. hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Abu Gurun’s Zeriba); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi).


493 =Rytiginia pauciflora= _Robyns._

Spinous shrub up to 15 ft. high; spines supra-axillary, opposite, up to
⅓ in. long. Leaves ovate, obtusely acuminate. Flowers small, solitary or
2 together; cor. glabrous with 6-8 tailed lobes. Fruit ⅓ in. long, 3-4
ribbed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Niamniam lands).


=R. euonymoides= _Blume._

Unarmed shrub, up to 20 ft. high. Leaves oval or ovate, obtusely
acuminate, obliquely narrowed at the base, chartaceous with small tufts
of hairs in axils of the lateral nerves beneath. Fl. 2-3 together,
minute; cor. throat hairy. Fruit ⅓ in. long, 3-5 ribbed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land).


494 =Fadogia leucophlœa= _Hiern._

Unarmed shrub. Leaves ovate-elliptic, obtusely acuminate, shortly
cuneate, about 2 in. long and 1 in. broad, glabrous, bright green. Fl.
clustered, crowded; calyx and ovary pubescent; corolla 6-lobed; disk
hairy. Fruit 2-3 lobed or oblique, ⅓ in. long, minutely pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land; Bongo-land).


=F. agrestis= _Schwfth._

Herbaceous, hairy undershrub, 2 ft. high, branching from the base.
Leaves ternate, oval. Fl. hairy, in short axillary panicles. Fruit
ribbed, tipped by persistent calyx, ½ in. broad.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=F. Cienkowskii= _Schwfth._

Hirsute undershrub, 2 ft. high. Leaves 3-4 together, oval, obtuse,
chartaceous; stipules apiculate. Fl. 1-3 on a short axillary peduncle;
cor. short, funnel-shaped; lobes 5-6. Drupe globose.

Fung Prov. (Fadoga).


=F. glaberrima= _Schwfth._

Glabrous undershrub; branches ternate. Leaves ternate, oval, subsessile.
Fl. minute, 3 together on an axillary peduncle; cor. greenish-white;
lobes 5-6.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


495 =Temnocalyx ancylanthus= _Robyns._

Puberulous undershrub, 5 ft. high. Leaves ternate, oval, chartaceous,
glabrous, 1-3 in. long; stip. apiculate, covering a ring of caducous
white hairs. Fl. nearly 1 in. long, greenish-white, 1-4 together on a
short peduncle; cor. funnel-shaped, 5-lobed; stigma 5-lobed at the tip.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Niamniam lands).

=var. puberula= _Robyns._

Leaves pubescent on the nerves below.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


496 =Craterispermum laurinum= _Benth._

Shrub. Leaves yellowish-green on both sides, opposite, obovate-oval, 2-9
in. long. Fl. ¼ in. long, in stalked clusters, 1 in. in diam.; cor.
white, funnel-shaped, ¾ in. diam. Berry obliquely globular, ab. ¼ in. in
diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. Schweinfurthii= _Hiern._

Undershrub. Leaves pale yellowish-green on both sides, oval acuminate,
coriaceous, 5-6 in. long; stipules broadly ovate, connate at base. Fl.
white, ⅓ in. long, in somewhat supra-axillary pedunculate heads. Berry
black-purple, ⅜ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


497 =Ixora radiata= _Hiern._

Large shrub, up to 20 ft. high. Leaves opposite, evergreen, oval to
narrow-elliptic, undulate, glossy, up to 12 in. long. Fl. 2-3 in. long,
rose-coloured, crowded in branched clusters; cor. tube slender, lobes ¼
in. long. Berry subglobose or subdidymous, ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=I. sp.?= TURA (Baggara)—Arab; KURUWI (J. Eliri) & TIMLEIRRUK
(Kadugli)—Nuba.

Shrub. Fl. not seen. Fruit a globular berry.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (on rocks).


498 =Pavetta subcana= _Hiern._ PALANJEKE—Golo.

Small, hoary shrub. Leaves opp., oval, pubescent, 1-2 in. long, rounded
or emarginate at apex. Fl. ¾ in. long, crowded, many together at ends of
short naked branches; cor. tube slender, pubescent, lobes 4. Berry
fleshy, pea-shaped.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=P. genipæfolia= _Sch._ & _Thonn.?_

Shrub. Leaves elliptic, acuminate, chartaceous, at first hirsute-
pubescent, 3-9 in. long. Fl. ⅔ in. long, in dense, globose panicles, 2-4
in. diam.; calyx-lobes obovate-oblong, foliaceous, ½ in. long; cor. tube
slender. Fr. globose, ⅓ in. diam., crowned by persistent calyx, shining,
with scattered hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


=P. gardeniæfolia= _Hochst._

Glabrous shrub, 10 ft. high. Leaves narrowly elliptical or obovate,
often marked with immersed glands, 1-3 in. long; stip. ovate, apiculate,
covering caducous hairs. Fl. 4-merous, white, ½ in. long, in drooping
corymbs, up to 1½ in. long. Berry fleshy, ¼ in. in diam.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 6,800 ft.).


=P. Oliveriana= _Hiern._

Velvety-hairy shrub. Leaves oval, subacuminate, up to 4 in. long. Fl.
white, 4-merous, 1½ in. long, in dense terminal corymbs, 5 in. in diam.
Berry fleshy.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=P. Baconia= _Hiern._

Large shrub or small tree. Leaves elliptical, acuminate, 3-8 in. long.
Fl. white, 4-merous, ab. ¼ in. long, in dense terminal corymbs 2-3 in.
across, with 2 foliaceous bracts at the base; cor. throat bearded. Berry
2-channelled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land).


=P. ruwenzoriensis= _S. Moore._

Shrub. Leaves elliptic, acuminate, thinly pubescent on both sides, 5 in.
long. Flowers in dense terminal corymbs. Calyx lobes linear. Corolla
nearly 1 in. long, pure white. Anthers dark.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=P. near P. ruwenzoriensis= _S. Moore._

Like the preceding, but corymbs axillary and terminal and leaves
narrowly obovate, glabrous.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


499 =Coffea sp.= (= =C. liberica= _Hiern?_).

Shrub. Leaves broadly elliptic, acute at the base, about 10 in. long and
5 in. broad, papery, glabrous. Flowers large. Corolla about 1¼ in. long.
Anthers exserted, ⅓ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


500 =Rutidea olenotricha= _Hiern._

Climbing shrub with opposite, shortly tomentose branches. Leaves opp.,
obovate-oval, with hairy tufts beneath in axils of lateral nerves, up to
5½ in. long. Flowers 5-merous, in little heads collected in terminal
pyramidal panicles; cor. whitish, hairy outside, with unpleasant smell.
Fruit pea-shaped, fleshy.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=R. sp.=

Climbing shrub. Leaves oblong-elliptic, rounded at the base, 4 in. long,
1¾ in. broad. Fruits globose, ¼ in. diam., glabrous.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land, Schwfth. 3113).


501 =Morinda lucida= _Benth._

Small tree; branchlets rounded. Leaves elliptic, 6 in. long, 3 in.
broad, shining. Peduncles in pairs, slender. Fruit a deeply lobed
syncarpium.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Meshra El Rek & Tonj).


=M. longiflora= _G. Don._

Shrub, often scandent. Leaves opp., oval, acuminate, 2-6 in. long;
stipules short, broad, connate and sheathing. Fl. 1-2 in. long, 3-8
together in terminal heads; cor. white or copper-coloured, 6-lobed. Fr.
a succulent syncarpium, 1½ in. in diam., orange-coloured.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).


502 =Psychotria sulphurea= _Schwfth._

Puberulous undershrub, 5 ft. high. Leaves ovate or oval, 5-6 in. long;
stip. broadly ovate, 3-pointed. Fl. ⅛ in. long, sulphur-coloured,
crowded in terminal, simple or branched cymes. Berry 2-lobed, ¼ in. in
diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo & Niamniam lands).


=P. cristata= _Hiern._

Shrubby. Leaves oval or elliptical, acuminate, 3-7 in. long, margins
revolute. Fl. minute, 5-merous, in dense corymbose cymes; cor. white
with yellow throat, lobes keeled and crested on back. Fr. subglobose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. & Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).


=P. Schweinfurthii= _Hiern._

Shrubby creeping plant. Leaves opp., oval or elliptical. Fl. ¼ in. long,
in crowded terminal panicles; cor. funnel-shaped, throat thinly hairy.
Fr. subglobose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=P. mucronata= _Hiern._

Glabrous undershrub, 3 ft. high. Leaves oval; stip. ovate, longer than
the petiole, bifid. Fl. cymose; cor. white, 5-lobed, sweet-scented like
the Elder. Fruit subglobose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. nubica= _Del._

Glabrous shrub, 7 ft. high. Leaves elliptical, 3 in. long; stip.
triangular. Fl. ½ in. long, 5-merous, 3-6 together, in 3-branched
terminal cymes. Fruit subglobose.

Fung Prov. (Singa).


503 =Geophila uniflora= _Hiern._

Creeping perennial, rooting at the nodes. Leaves reniform, cordate, 1-2
in. long, opposite; stip. ovate or rounded, 1 line long. Fl. solitary,
white, ⅓ in. long, bracteate at base; cor. throat densely bearded. Fr.
ovoid, ⅙ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Hoo River).


=G. involucrata= _Schwfth._

Creeping puberulous herb. Leaves almost round; stip. semicircular. Fl.
enclosed in cup-shaped involucre of oval bracts, white, ⅓ in. long. Fr.
fleshy, pea-shaped.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).


504 =Cephaëlis suaveolens= _Schwfth._

Undershrub, 3-5 ft. high. Leaves opp., oval; stip. broadly oval, connate
at base, bifid, puberulous. Fl. ab. ¼ in. long, 5-merous, white, sweet-
scented, crowded in subterminal and axillary, solitary heads, 1 in. in
diam., with 4 involucral bracts. Berry oval, 12-grooved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: near Okel).


505 =Diodia breviseta= _Benth._

Trailing or scandent herb, with scabrid, quadrangular branches. Leaves
opp., elliptical, 1-2 in. long, margins scabrid or serrulate; stipules
of 5 bristles arising from a short truncate base. Fl. white, 4-merous,
sessile, few or several together, axillary. Fr. dicoccous, ⅙ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: near the Boddo River).


506 =Gaillonia calycoptera= _Jaub._ & _Spach._

Rigid undershrub, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp. linear, fleshy, sessile, ¼-1
in. long; stipules sheathing, each with 2 bristles and adnate to the
base of the leaves. Fl. small, sessile, or nearly so, solitary or few
together, sheathed at base by a pale, calyx-like, 6-cleft involucre, in
simple or alternately branched terminal spikes. Fruit dicoccous.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba).


507 =Spermacoce tenuissima= _Schwfth._

Very slender glabrous annual. Leaves opp., scabrous, sessile, narrow-
linear, acute; stip. truncate and tipped with 1-4 bristles (setæ). Fl.
4-merous in small axillary and terminal sessile heads based by 2 pairs
of leaves at right angles to each other; cor. purplish. Fr. dicoccous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. Phyteuma= _Schwfth._

Stiff hispid annual, 2 ft. high. Leaves scabrous, sessile, linear-
lanceolate, 1-3 in. long. Fl. pale-purple in dense axillary and terminal
heads based by 1-3 pairs of leaves. Fr. dicoccous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land).


=S. senensis= _Hiern._

Herb. Leaves opp., sessile, lanceolate or elliptical, with scabrous
margins; stipules with hairy sheath and 5-7 setæ. Fl. white, ¼ in. long,
in axillary sessile, verticillate heads based by 1-2 pairs of leaves.
Capsule straw-coloured, ⅙ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Saoleil); Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).


=S. hebecarpa= _Oliv._

Slender annual, 18 in. high; branches 4-angled. Leaves opp., sessile,
linear, scabrid on the margins, 2 in. long; stip. with hairy sheath and
3-5 setæ. Fl. in axillary and terminal, sessile, leafy heads based by
the dilated sheath of the stip. of 1-3 pairs of leaves. Fr. pubescent.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).

=var. major= _Schwfth._

More robust than type and up to 2 ft. high. Leaves up to 3 in. long.
Bracteoles very numerous, longer than subulate calyx teeth.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. leucadea= _Hochst._

Erect annual with whitish hairs; stems and branches 4-angled. Leaves
linear or lanceolate, sessile, scabrous, 1-2 in. long; stipules
yellowish, with 5 bristles. Fl. small, 4-merous, in axillary and
terminal, verticillate and capitate, leafy heads. Capsule ¼ in. long,
hairy above.

Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=S. radiata= _Sieber._

Hirsute annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., sessile, linear, hispid on
the midrib beneath, 2½ in. long; stip. with 7-9 slender bristles. Fl.
small, white, in dense clusters, up to 1 in. diam., at the ends of stem
and branches.

Kordofan Prov.


=S. Ruelliæ= _DC._

Hispid herb; branches 4-angled. Leaves opp., sessile, nearly linear, up
to 3 in. long; stip. with 7 slender bristles. Fl. white, small,
verticillate in axils and terminal; clusters sessile. Fr. dicoccous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. Kotschyana= _Oliv._

Procumbent or erect herb, 18 in. high, 4-angled, scabrous. Leaves opp.,
sessile, linear, up to 3 in. long. Fl. small, in dense verticillate
axillary and terminal, leafy and bracteolate heads 1 in. in diam.;
bracteoles pale-red, filiform. Fr. pubescent, dicoccous.

Blue Nile Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé).


=S. compacta= _Hochst._

Herb, 8-16 in. high; stem marked with raised lines. Leaves opp., linear
to oval, 1-2 in. long, scabrous on margins. Fl. small, in dense
verticillate, leafy, sessile terminal and axillary heads, ½ to ¾ in.
diam. Capsule minute, puberulous.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon).


=S. dibrachiata= _Oliv._

Rigid herb, 18 in. high, white-hispid. Leaves lanceolate with revolute
margins, 2-3 in. long. Fl. ¾ in. long, sky-blue or purple, in dense
terminal sessile heads based by the dilated stip. of the uppermost
leaves. Fruit dicoccous.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=S. globosa= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Undershrub, 2-3 ft. high; branchlets 4-angled. Leaves opp., narrow-
elliptic, 2½ in. long; stip. with 3-7 bristles. Fl. small, white, in
terminal globose clusters based by the reflexed or obsolete upper pair
of leaves. Fr. dicoccous.

White Nile Prov.


=S. sphærostigma= _A. Rich._

Annual, 2½ ft. high. Leaves opp., lanceolate, up to 4 in. long; stip.
with 5-7 bristles. Fl. ½ in. long in dense sessile, terminal and
axillary heads, exceeded by the uppermost, spreading leaves. Fr.
dicoccous, bursting round the base.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur-land).


508 =Octodon filifolium= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Erect annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., filiform up to 4 in. long. Fl.
10-20 together within the stipular sheath of the upper leaves and
surrounded by numerous filiform bracts; calyx teeth 8, purple; cor.
lobes 4, white. Fr. dicoccous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, swampy places).


509 =Mitracarpum scabrum= _Zucc._

Sturdy branched annual 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., oval or oblong, 1-2½
in. long, with scabrous margins; stip. with 5-7 bristles. Fl. white in
verticillate and terminal heads. Fr. more or less 2-lobed, bursting in a
ring round the middle, the upper portion somewhat like a mitre.

Nubia; Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro, Muriel S/93); Darfur
Prov. (Zalingei).


510 =Rubia discolor= _Turcz._

Scabrous, scandent, perennial; branches 4-angled. Leaves verticillate,
ovate, cordate, hoary-tomentose beneath, up to 2 in. long, 3-5 nerved.
Fl. small, in axillary and terminal cymes. Fr. 2-lobed, fleshy.

Bahr El Jebel (“beyond 2½° N. lat.”).


511 =Galium Aparine= _Linn._

Scandent scabrid annual with 4-angled branches. Leaves 6-9 in a whorl,
linear to narrow-elliptic, finely prickly on the margins, up to 1 in.
long, 1-nerved. Fl. small, white or greenish. Fr. minute, covered with
hooked hairs.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit and Has Has).


=G. simense= _Hochst._

Prostrate, glabrous and angular herb, ab. 1 ft. long. Leaves 6 in a
whorl, linear, 1-nerved. Fl. purple, 3 together at ends of short lateral
branches. Fr. 2-lobed, coriaceous.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Soturba).


=G. Decaisnei= _Boiss._

Annual, 6-9 in. high. Leaves 6 in a whorl, the upper linear, 1-nerved,
the lower spathulate. Fl. purple, minute, in slender divaricate,
terminal panicles.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Soturba).


=G. rotundifolium= _Linn._

Perennial; stems angular, hispidulous. Leaves 4 in a whorl, oval,
3-nerved, bristly on margins, ¾ in. long. Fl. small, white in terminal
branched panicles, 4-merous. Fr. bristly-hairy.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, 9,200 ft.).


=G. Mollugo= _Linn._

Nearly glabrous perennial. Leaves 6-8 in a whorl, linear 1-nerved, ½ in.
long, finely scabrid on margins. Fl. small, white, in branched terminal
panicles. Fr. very small, subrugose, coriaceous.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=G. sp.=

Very small delicate herb with thread-like branches. Leaves whorled,
linear, ⅛ in. long. Flowers minute, on very slender pedicels. Ovary
villous.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


                              =COMPOSITÆ.=

_A. Flower-heads homogamous; florets all tubular and hermaphrodite,
white, rose, purple or violet, never distinctly yellow. Leaves alternate
or with all or only lower leaves opposite._


512 =Sparganophorus Vaillantii= _Gærtn._

Glabrous annual. Leaves alternate, linear-lanceolate to elliptical.
Flower-heads ab. ⅓ in. in diam.; bracts numerous; involucre
hemispherical.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


513 =Ethulia conyzoides= _Linn._ HASHISH EL FARRAS, RIHAN & UMREHAUN
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Branched herb, ab. 3 ft. high. Capitula of purple florets, up to ¼ in.
broad, in diffuse corymbose cymes; invol. bracts numerous. Leaves linear
to narrow elliptic, 1-5 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile
Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas &
Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post).


514 =Erlangea cordifolia= _Benth._

Erect branching herb. Leaves alternate, amplexicaul, sessile, serrulate,
scabrid above and hoary beneath, 1-3 in. long. Capitula campanulate ab.
⅓ in. diam.; florets purple.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok).


=E. Rüppellii= _Sch. Bip._

Hoary-tomentose herb, ½-2 ft. high. Leaves alternate, or the lower opp.,
linear-lanceolate, 1-2½ in. long. Capitula ab. ⅓ in. in diam., in
diffuse terminal corymbose cymes.

Upper White Nile Prov.


=E. polycephala= _O._ & _H._

Erect, more or less hoary-tomentose herb. Upper leaves lanceolate or
ovate-lanceolate, 1-2 in. long, base sessile, obtuse or amplexicaul.
Capitula small in diffuse cymose panicles.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur to Meshra, Niamniam-land).


515 =Vernonia jugalis= _O._ & _H._

Herb 7-8 ft. high. Leaves obovate or oval, cuspidate, softly tomentose
beneath, 1-3 in. long; capitula campanulate, ab. 30-flowered, ab. ½ in.
long, in dense corymbose cymes 6 in. in diam.; florets rose-lilac.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=V. atriplicifolia= _Jaub._ & _Spach._

Undershrub, ab. 3 ft. high, covered with close stiff silky hairs and
scattered sessile glands. Leaves (as with others in this genus)
alternate, ovate to rhomboidal with 1-3 coarse teeth on each side, up to
1 in. long. Capitula ab. 12-flowered in a diffuse leafy panicle, red or
purplish.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin).


=V. turbinata= _Oliv._ & _Hiern._

Large herb, closely white-tomentose. Leaves subsessile, elliptic-oblong,
entire or denticulate, scabrous above, 2½ in. long. Capitula turbinate,
many-flowered, ⅔ in. wide, purple, in an elongated terminal panicle.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi woods).


=V. Perrottetii= _Sch. Bip._ AKIEIRA (Goz el Siada)—Dinka.

Pubescent or puberulous annual, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves narrow-linear,
scabrid, up to 2 in. long. Capitula ab. 1 in. diam., campanulate,
purple, solitary, terminating the numerous branches.

Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Hillet Nu); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=V. violacea= _O._ & _H._

Erect herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves subsessile, obovate-oblong, crenate-
dentate, up to 3 in. long. Cap. hemispherical, many-flowered ab. ⅔ in.
wide, solitary, terminating numerous naked peduncles, 1-3 in. long.
Inner pappus violaceous.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=V. ambigua= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Erect, pilose annual ½-2 ft. high. Leaves sessile, with subauricled
base, oblanceolate to linear-oblanceolate, up to 4 in. long. Cap.
hemispherical ab. ¾ in. diam., in terminal corymbose cymes, up to 1 ft.
diam.; cor. purple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Madi woods).


=V. undulata= _O._ & _H._

Erect, puberulous herb, ab. 2 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate and ovate,
undulate, 1-2 in. long. Cap. ab. 20-flowered, ab. ⅓ in. across, in a lax
corymbose cyme 6 in. across; flowers rose-blue.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land, near Gumba).


=V. cinerascens= _Sch. Bip._

Very like _V. atriplicifolia_; differs chiefly by its setaceous pappus.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=V. Smithiana= _Less._

Herb, 1-2 ft. high, woody at base and silvery-hairy. Leaves subsessile,
lanceolate-oblong to ovate-elliptic, silvery beneath, up to 2½ in. long.
Heads hemispherical, ab. 1/5 in. wide, ab. 15-flowered, in small
terminal panicles.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=V. plumbaginifolia= _Fenzl._

Herb, ab. 2 ft. high; stock woody. Leaves obovate-oblong or the upper
linear, up to 1½ in. long. Heads campanulate, many-flowered, ⅓ in.
across in much branched terminal cymes.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: forest glades,
Gir).


=V. purpurea= _Sch. Bip._

Rigid scabrid herb up to 4 ft. high. Leaves elliptic-oblong, acute,
serrulate, scabrous, up to 6 in. long. Cap. hemispherical, many-
flowered, dull purple, ¾-1½ in. diam., solitary or in few-headed
terminal cymes.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi woods).


=V. Unionis= _Schultz Bip._

Erect, thinly tomentose herb, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves ovate or ovate-
lanceolate, upper lanceolate dentate-serrate, up to 6 in. long. Heads
many-flowered, rose-purple, ½ in. diam., in a terminal panicled corymb
¼-1 ft. diam.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=V. pauciflora= _Less._ GALANVA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Erect, pubescent annual, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves elongated, acutely
attenuate at both ends, serrulate, up to 6 in. long, dull yellowish
green. Heads ab. 1 in. across, purple, in a terminal, forking, often
leafy, cyme 6-12 in. long, and 3-6 in. wide.

Red Sea Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Upper
White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Darfur Prov. (Zalingei).


=V. amygdalina= _Del._ SURIB—Arab; HAIFERET—Rashida; TEIDE
(Dilling)—Nuba; SHUGEIT—Hameg.

Shrub or small tree. Leaves lanceolate or lanceolate-oblong, narrowed
both ends, 4-8 in. long. Cap. ab. 20-flowered, ⅛-¼ in. wide, white, in
dense, much branched globose or pyramidal panicles 4-12 in. diam.

Red Sea Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra: Wadi Gindi, 7,000 ft.); Fung
Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post); White Nile, Kordofan & Bahr El Ghazal
Provinces.


=V. inulæfolia= _Steud._

Erect scabrous herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves ovate, or upper lanceolate,
distantly serrulate 1-4 in. long; petioles somewhat clasping at the
base, 2 lines long. Heads ab. ½ in. diam., many-flowered, in small
terminal corymbs, 1½-3 in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=V. infundibularis= _O._ & _H._

Tall glabrous herb. Leaves linear to linear-oblong, entire, 1-3½ in.
long, subsessile. Heads turbinate, many-flowered, 1-1½ in. diam, bluish
violet, solitary or few together on peduncles up to 2½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: near Kulensho).


=V. Schweinfurthii= _O._ & _H._

Perennial branching from a woody stock, ab. 1 ft. high. Leaves linear,
subsessile, almost glabrous, ½-2 in. long. Heads turbinate-
hemispherical, reddish violet, ab. ½ in. diam., on peduncles up to 3 in.
long, solitary or in corymbose cymes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo, Jur & Mittu lands).


=V. gerberæformis= _O._ & _H._

Dwarf perennial ab. 6 in. high. Leaves radical, oblanceolate,
denticulate, glabrous, 4-6 in. long. Scapes up to 1½ in. long, bearing 1
or more linear bracts. Heads widely-campanulate, ab. 1 in. long,
solitary erect. Fl. bluish.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai).


=V. Kotschyana= _Sch. Bip._

Tall erect herb. Leaves oblong-elliptical to oblanceolate, 2-6 in. long.
Heads 1½-2 in. diam., solitary or in lax terminal cymes; cor. violet;
inner scales of invol. wavy-linear-lanceolate, scarious.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Mulbes); Upper White Nile Prov. (from Sobat
south); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongoland); Mongalla Prov.; Darfur Prov.
(Kulme).


=V. firma= _O._ & _H._

Herb; branches grooved, softly tomentose. Leaves elliptical, narrowed
both ends, serrate-dentate, green and glabrous above, pale, tinged with
red beneath. Heads campanulate, many-flowered ab. ½ in. diam., in a
stiff corymbose cyme, leafy below, 6 in. diam; fl. rose-blue, ½ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Linduku stream).


=V. pumila= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._ BUTRUNGU—Golo.

Dwarf herb from perennial rootstock, 2-4 in. high, more or less leafless
at flowering time. Heads 1-1½ in. diam., solitary or cymose; fl. purple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (grassy plains); Bahr El Jebel (Madi woods).


=V. Aschersonii= _Sch. Bip._

Diffuse shrubby herb, ab. 1 ft. high, extremities and leaves white
pubescent. Leaves oblanceolate, sessile, up to 1½ in. long. Heads
campanulate, ab. 20-flowered, ⅓ in. broad, on slender pedicels, ab. 1
in. long, in numerous lax terminal cymes; cor. purple.

Darfur Prov. (Prairies 20-80 m. N.E. of El Fasher); Red Sea Prov. (near
Talug Hilla).


=V. theophrastifolia= _Schwfth._

Ab. 15 ft. high. Upper leaves oblanceolate, denticulate, obtuse, base
sessile auricled amplexicaul, scurfy above, puberulous beneath, 13½ in.
long. Heads subsessile, ab. 8-flowered, clustered 1-4 together,
campanulate, ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


=V. Thomsoniana= _O._ & _H._

Shrub with grooved, obscurely angular branches. Leaves elliptic-oblong,
attenuate to the narrow-winged petiole, 3-4 in. long. Heads ⅙ in. diam.,
campanulate-oblong, closely crowded in corymbose terminal panicles, 6
in. across.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: below Kero & Reggo); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi); Darfur Prov. (Kulme?).


=V. conferta= _Benth._

Tree, 20-25 ft. high with stout tomentose branches. Leaves obovate or
elliptic-oblong, sinuous, thinly tomentose beneath, 1-3 ft. long. Heads
⅓ in. long, 10-18-flowered, in spiciform racemes arranged in ample
terminal panicles; cor. greenish-white.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Diagbe River).


=V. sp.=

Small tree. Leaves oblanceolate, 2-2½ in. long, stellate-pubescent,
denticulate. Heads cymose. Bracts chaffy. Achenes deeply grooved,
pubescent Pappus straw-coloured.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (on alluvium at Tonj, N. 313 S.G.H.).


=V. sp.=

Weak herb. Leaves obovate, remotely toothed, 2 in. long, softly
pubescent. Invol. bracts linear, very acute, ⅙ in. long pubescent.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor. 1631 S.G.H.).


516 =Triplotaxis stellulifera= _Hutchinson._

Diffuse decumbent annual, 2 ft. high. Leaves alternate, ovate, ½ in. to
nearly 2 in. long. Heads broad-campanulate, ab. ⅙ in. wide, ab.
20-flowered, in loose corymbose cymes; fl. violet.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Assika River).


517 =Elephantopus scaber= _Linn._

Erect villous or hirsute herb, 2-8 ft. high. Leaves alternate,
oblanceolate to obovate-elliptic or oblong, crenate-serrate with minute
mucros on the tips of the serratures, scabrid above, pubescent beneath,
4-8 in. long; petiole amplexicaul. Heads ½ to ¾ in. diam. with an
involucre of 3-5 ovate rotundate bracts.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).

Said to possess febrifugal and diuretic properties.


518 =Adenostemma viscosum= _Forst._

Herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate, cuneate at base, serrate or
crenate-dentate up to 6 in. long; pet. up to 2½ in. long. Heads ab. ⅓
in. wide in usually viscous pubescent axillary and terminal panicles;
cor. white.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Tuhami’s Zeriba).


519 =Ageratum conyzoides= _Linn._

Hirsute herb. Leaves opp., or upper alternate, ovate, obtuse, base
narrowed, crenate, 1-3 in. long. Heads ¼ in. diam., in dense terminal
panicled corymbs. Fl. white to lilac or purple.

Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the
Nabambisso River).

An invading weed in most parts of the Tropics.


520 =Eupatorium africanum= _O._ & _H._

Pubescent. Leafy herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves alternate, ovate or ovate-
lanceolate, base rounded, 3-nerved, 3 in. long. Heads ab. 5-flowered, ⅙
in. wide, in dense terminal, corymbose cymes, 1½-4 in. broad. Fl. white
or purple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: south of Gumba).


521 =Mikania scandens= _Willd._

Twiner, ab. 40 ft. high. Leaves opp., from ovate to deltoid or hastate,
base cordate or auricled, 1-5 in. long; pet. ½-5 in. long. Heads ab. ¼
in. long, subsessile in terminal and axillary corymbose panicles. Fl.
purplish, white or pale yellow.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: near the Mbrwole River).


_B. Flower-heads various, mostly_ (1) _heterogamous; outer (ray)
florets, usually female, sometimes neuter, ligulate, tubular or
filiform; inner (disk) florets tubular, hermaphrodite, rarely wholly
sterile;_ (2) _homogamous by suppression of ray florets, tubular or
campanulate and hermaphrodite;_ (3) _unisexual. Corolla white, largely
yellow, but also pink, purple or blue._


522 =Microtrichia Perrottetii= _DC._

Pubescent herb, 1 ft. high. Leaves alt., obovate, coarsely toothed, 1½
in. long. Heads many-flowered, small, yellow, heterogamous. Fl. tubular,
denticulate, disk campanulate 5-fid.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: by the Tonj River near Addai).


523 =Dichrocephala latifolia= _DC._

Erect herb, 5 ft. high. Leaves alt., lyrate, 1½-3 in. long. Heads
subglobose, heterog.; fem. fl. white, tubular, 2-3 dentate; hermaphr.
fl. purple campanulate.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


524 =Grangea maderaspatana= _Poir._ RIMITH (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab;
RUBEL—Rashida; KEIRANI—Hadendowa.

Hairy herb up to 1 ft. Leaves alt., obovate, pinnatifid, ½-3 in. long.
Heads yellow, small, 1-3 together, terminal or leaf-opposed, heterog.;
fem. fl. narrow tubular, 2-4-fid; hermaphr. fl. campanulate, 4-5-fid.

Red Sea Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov.
(Jebelein); Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongoland: Tonj River); Karawan.

The leaves are valued for their anodyne properties; they are also said
to be stomachic and anti-spasmodic.


525 =Ceruana pratensis= _Forsk._

Hairy herb, 2 ft. high. Leaves alt., obovate, pinnatifid or coarsely
toothed, base often clasping and auricled. Heads small, yellow cymose,
heterog.; fem. fl. tubular, 2-4-fid; hermaphr. fl. campanulate, 5-fid.

North Sudan; Khartoum, Blue Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


526 =Felicia Richardii= _Vatke._

Wiry herb or shrub. Leaves alt., elliptic-oblong, 1 in. long, hispid.
Heads solitary at ends of branches, heterog.; fem. fl. ligulate; disk
fl. hermaphr. or wholly or partly sterile, tubular, 5-toothed; anthers
petaloid, linear-oblong. Fl. white.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 9,000 ft.).


527 =Microglossa volubilis= _DC._

Small shrub, sometimes scandent. Leaves alt., ovate-acuminate, 1-4 in.
long, puberulous. Heads small, in cymes 2-8 in. wide, heterog.; fem. fl.
ligulate, ligule narrow, white; hermaphr. fl. tubular, yellow.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: gallery wood near Kulensho)


528 =Conyza ægyptiaca= _Ait._ DINSÏS & NAKHSHASH EL DUBBAN—Arab.

Hairy herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves linear-oblong to spathulate, margin
subentire to pinnatifid, base amplexicaul, 1-4 in. long. Heads small, in
corymbose, axillary or terminal panicles, heterog.; fem. fl. filiform,
whitish, ligule none; hermaphr. fl. tubular, 5-toothed, yellow.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.;
Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat mouth); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-
land: near the Boddo River); Lake Rudolf.


=C. stricta= _Willd._

Woody herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves alt. linear, spathulate, pinnatifid or
dentate, amplexicaul, hispid, ½ in. long. Heads many-flowered in dense
corymbose cymes, heterog.; fem. fl. filiform-ligulate whitish; hermaphr.
fl. tubular 5-toothed, yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 9,000 ft.).


=C. Hochstetteri= _Sch. Bip._

Stem creeping; branches erect, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves alt., oblong-
lanceolate, auriculate-cordate, dentate, hairy, 1-2 in. long. Heads
finally globose, in dense terminal cymes, ab. 1 in. diam., heterog.;
female fl. filiform; hermaphr. tubular, 5-toothed.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


529 =Blumea aurita= _DC._ BOFUFA—Zande.

Pubescent erect herb, 3 ft. high. Leaves alt.; radical leaves obovate or
elliptical; cauline same or lyrate-pinnatipartite, auricled, 4½ in.
long. Heads in corymbose terminal panicles, heterog.; fem. fl. filiform,
disk fl. hermaphr. or sterile.

Nubia; Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Mittu-land, Kuraggera); Bahr El Jebel (Sudd 8° 40″); Mongalla
Prov.


=B. abyssinica= _Sch. Bip._

Herb, 18 in. high. Leaves alt., linear, or lower oblanceolate, clasping.
Fl. much as above.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=B. bifoliata= _DC._

Herb. Leaves glandular-pilose, oblong-lanceolate, toothed in the upper
half, broad at the base, about 1 in. long. Heads in leafy panicles ¼ in.
long. Bracts linear, pilose.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=B. lacera= _DC._

Pubescent herb, 4 ft. high. Leaves alt., obovate or oblanceolate,
dentate, 1½ in. long. Heads purplish, in terminal panicles, heterog., as
above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land, & Gazelle River); Mongalla Prov.
(Kenissa); Darfur Prov (J. Marra, Niurnya, 6,500 ft.).

The plant is used as a febrifuge, also to stop bleeding. Mixed with
black pepper, it is given in cholera. An astringent eye-wash is made
from the leaves.


=B. gariepina= _DC._

Small shrub covered with dense silky hairs. Leaves linear, decurrent, ½
in. long. Heads ⅓ in. long. Bracts subulate-linear. Flowers thread-like.

Darfur Prov. (J. Meidob).


530 =Laggera alata= _Schultz Bip._

Stout tomentose, glandular herb, up to 6 ft. high; branches winged.
Leaves alt. elliptical or elongate-oblong, decurrent, dentate, up to 10
in. long. Heads many-fl., in terminal panicles, heterog.; fem. fl.
filiform; hermaphr. fl. tubular, toothed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit, near Deim Bekir & Bongo-land, Sabbi).


=L. pterodonta= _Sch. Bip._

Stout viscid herb, 2-7 ft. high. Leaves alt., elliptic-oblong or
lanceolate, decurrent, dentate, 6 in. long. Heads in terminal panicles,
hermaphr., as above.

Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land, Kuraggera).


=L. crassifolia= _Schultz Bip._

Shrubby, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves alt., elliptic or oblong, glandulose-
puberulous, decurrent, 2-3 in. long. Heads in terminal panicles. Fl. as
above.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


531 =Pluchea Dioscoridis= _DC._

Shrubby, 6 ft. or more. Leaves alt., oval to lanceolate, often
auriculate-cordate, 1-2 in. long. Heads in terminal corymbose or globose
panicles, heterog.; female fl. filiform; disk fl. tubular, mouth 3-fid,
hermaphr. or sterile.

Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


532 =Epaltes gariepina= _Steetz._ RIMITH (Kordn.)—Arab; OLEI—Hadendowa;
UM MUSEG—Rashida.

Scabrid undershr.; branches winged. Leaves alt., linear-oblong, acute,
decurrent, 2½ in. long. Heads 3-6 together at extremities, heterog.;
fem. fl. tubular or filiform; disk fl. tubular, dilated above,
hermaphr., often sterile.

Kordofan Prov. (J. Um Darrag); Darfur Prov. (60 m. east of El Fasher);
Kassala Prov. (Um Adam).


533 =Sphæranthus suaveolens= _DC._ SAGHLIFT, FORGEYH, SIRR EL WARD—Arab.

Erect herb, 2 ft. high; stem and branches winged. Leaves alt., linear to
elliptic oblong, decurrent, dentate, 2-5 in. long. Heads few-flowered,
red, subglobose, densely crowded on ovoid common receptacles which are
solitary or 2-3 together, terminal or lateral. Fl. white or pink,
heterog., female tubular 3-dentate; disk fl. tubular 5-dent. or sterile.

Blue Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo, Mittu & Niamniam lands).


=S. Steetzii= _O._ & _H._

Erect herb, 1-2 ft. high; branches winged above. Leaves linear to
oblong, decurrent, ab. 2 in. long. Heads 5-flowered, the central fl.
only male, the others female; common receptacle hemispherical,
terminating stem and branches.

Blue Nile Prov.


=S. nubicus= _Sch. Bip._

Erect glandular-hairy annual, ab. 2 ft. high; upper branches winged.
Leaves linear to lanceolate, decurrent, 1-3 in. long. Heads 3-9
flowered, the central one male; common receptacle slightly convex,
terminal.

Kordofan Prov.


=S. Brounæ= _Robyns._

Herb, 1 ft. high, strongly scented, glandular and pilose. Leaves
sessile, auriculate at the base, oblong, ½ in. long. Heads compound,
globose, pedunculate, ⅓ in. in diam., pink.

Kordofan Prov. (near Agari).


534 =Phagnalon Schweinfurthii= _Schultz Bip._

White lanate undershrub. Leaves alt., linear, amplexicaul, 2 in. long.
Heads wide-campanulate, many-flowered, terminal or from upper axils,
heterog.; fem. fl. tubular-filiform, denticulate; hermaphr. tubular,
5-toothed.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Soturba).


=P. scalarum= _Schweinfth._

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 9,200 ft.).


535 =Achyrocline luzuloides= _Vatke._

White lanate undershr. Leaves linear, subamplexicaul, 2 in. long. Heads
4-8 flowered in dense hemispherical, terminal cymes, heterogamous; fem.
fl. 3-5 radiate; hermaphr. 1-3 together; involucre white, shining.

Red Sea Prov.; between Suakin & Berber.


=A. glumacea= _O._ & _H._

Hoary lanate undershr. Leaves narrow-linear, 1-4 in. long. Heads 5-8
flowered (female 4-5 and hermaphr. 1-3 together), sessile, in crowded
branched corymbose or globose cymes; involucre scales shining, white or
pale-yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: high zone).


=A. Schimperi= _Sch. Bip._

Loose straggling herb, hoary tomentose all over. Leaves ovate, acute,
1½-2 in. long; flower-heads oblong, 4-5 flowered, sessile in dense
corymbs; bracts shining.

Red Sea Prov. (foot of Has Has).


536 =Gnaphalium luteo-album= _Linn._

Erect cottony herb. Leaves alt., linear or spathulate, semi-amplexicaul,
1-3 in. long. Heads campanulate, many-flowered, subsessile, many
together in crowded clusters, terminal or axillary, heterog.; fem. fl.
filiform; hermaphr. fl. 4-5 in each head; invol. bracts straw-coloured.

Fung Prov. (Saoleil); Kordofan Prov.


=G. Unionis= _Schultz Bip._

Lanate annual, up to 1 ft. high. Leaves linear, subamplexicaul, ½-1 in.
long, lanate. Heads campanulate, crowded in terminal, often involucrate
clusters. Fem. fl. filiform; hermaphr. fl. 6-8-15 in each head; invol.
bracts white at tips, woolly outside.

Dongola Prov. (Debba); Kordofan Prov.


=G. pulvinatum= _Del._

Prostrate, lanate-tomentose annual; branches 3-5 in. long. Leaves alt.,
spathulate, attenuate to base. Heads campanulate, in subglobose leafy or
involucrate clusters; hermaphr. fl. 4-6; fem. fl. numerous; invol. as
above.

White Nile Prov. (above El Eish); Kordofan Prov.


=G. niliacum= _Raddi._

Cottony herb, 3-10 in. high. Leaves alt., spathulate or obovate,
attenuate into short petiole. Heads campanulate, sessile, in dense
spiciform terminal clusters; fem. fl. numerous; hermaphr. fl. 4-5 outer
invol. lanate; midrib green.

Dongola Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit).


537 =Helichrysum rosulatum= _O._ & _H._

Procumbent, tomentose perennial, 1½ in. high. Leaves alt., spathulate,
oblong, emarginate, ½-1 in. long, crowded at base of branches. Capitula
6-7 all hermaphr., many together forming a subglobose head; invol.
scales purple.

Red Sea Prov. (shores of the Red Sea).


=H. Nimmoanum= _O._ & _H._

Woolly white, shrubby plant. Leaves alt., oblong or ovate, ab. 1 in.
long. Capitula 8-10 flowered, hermaphr., crowded in dense branched
terminal corymbs; invol. scales straw-coloured.

Red Sea Prov. (shores of the Red Sea).


=H. gracilipes= _O._ & _H._

Procumbent rosulate, white woolly herb, giving out offshoots. Leaves
elliptic, ½ in. long. Capitula hermaphr., 20-flowered, solitary at ends
of branches; invol. scales straw-coloured.

Red Sea Prov.


=H. undatum= _Less._

Erect white-woolly perennial, 4 ft. high. Leaves linear to lanceolate,
up to 5 in. long. Capitula hermaphr., with orange fimbrillæ, crowded in
terminal corymbose cymes; 1-6 in. diam.; invol. scales rose-coloured.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=H. abyssinicum= _Sch. Bip._

Shrubby, 18 in. high. Leaves linear or linear-oblong, densely tomentose,
ab. 1 in. long. Capitula heterog., 50-fl., yellow, crowded in dense
globose clusters, 1-3 in. wide, terminal; fem. fl. filiform; invol.
scales pale-yellow, shining.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra).


538 =Leysera capillifolia= _DC._

Slender glandular-scabrid annual. Leaves filiform or linear, crowded, 1
in. long. Cap. yellow, heterog., solitary on slender subterminal
peduncles; fem. fl. ligulate, ligule very small; hermaphr. fl. tubular,
5-cleft.

Red Sea Prov. (Coast: Soturba, J. Shellal at 3,000 ft., Suakin).


539 =Inula macrophylla= _Schultz Bip._

Perennial, 2-5 ft. high. Leaves alt., oval or ovate, 1 ft. or more long,
upper cordate-amplexicaul, tawny-tomentose. Capitula hermaphr., yellow,
in a dense corymbose terminal cyme, 4-8 in. wide.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora).


540 =Iphiona scabra= _DC._

Glandular scabrid undershrub. Leaves alt., subulate-pungent, 1 in. long
with 2-6 small basal spines. Capit. hermaphr., yellowish-white,
14-flowered, solitary, axillary or terminal.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Soturba).


541 =Pegolettia senegalensis= _Cass._

Hispid annual, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves alt. linear or oblanceolate, ½-1
in. long. Capit. hermaphr., yellow, turning purple, 18-30 flowered,
solitary, terminal.

Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa); Kordofan Prov.


542 =Vicoa auriculata= _Cass._

Annual, 1-3 ft. Leaves alt., linear-lanceolate to oblong, auriculate,
amplexicaul, ½-3 in. long. Capit. hermaphr., orange-yellow, forming a
loose terminal panicle.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post); White
Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Bongo-lands).


543 =Pulicaria petiolaris= _Jaub._ & _Spach._

Somewhat woody herb, up to 1½ ft. high, glandular-puberulous and
appressed pubescent. Leaves alt. ½-2 in. long, oval or lanceolate,
dentate, cuneate or truncate at base; petiole winged, amplexicaul, up to
1 in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow, in loose corymbs; fem. fl. with
minute ligule.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Fung Prov.


=P. Grantii= _O._ & _H._

Shrubby, 2 ft. or more; stems glandular puberulous. Leaves linear,
sessile, short tomentose, up to 1 in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow,
solitary, terminal, many-flowered. Ligule of fem. fl. small; hermaphr.
fl. tubular, 5-dentate.

Khartoum Prov. (16° N.L.).


=P. undulata= _DC._ RIHAN (Kordn.), ARRĀWAL (Atbara), RUBBUL, GHUBEYRA,
& KUTKAT—Arab.

Woolly, strongly-scented herb, ½-2 ft. high. Leaves linear to
oblanceolate, dentate, undulate, auriculate-amplexicaul, ½-2 in. long.
Capit. heterog., yellow, many-flowered, solitary, terminal.

Red Sea Prov.; Kassala Prov.; Æthiopia (J. El Ghazal); Khartoum, Blue
Nile, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=P. crispa= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._

White tomentose herb, 1-2½ ft. high. Leaves linear to obovate-oblong,
auriculate amplexicaul, ¾-1½ in. long, denticulate-crisped. Capit.
heterog., yellow, many-flowered, loosely panicled, terminal; hermaphr.
fl. 4-5 dentate.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Dongola Prov. (Merowe); Khartoum Prov.
(North); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Abu Nuer, 80 m. E. of El Fasher).

The dried plant is applied to bruises on cattle.


=P. Rüppellii= _Schultz._

Small white woolly herb. Leaves obovate, spathulate, denticulate,
auricled and amplexicaul, ½-2½ in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow,
solitary and terminal; ligule of fem. fl. long and 3-dentate.

Red Sea Prov. (shores between 11° and 12° N.L.).


=P. vulgaris= _Gærtn._ RÏMÏTH (Kordn.), ZAGHIL & ABU ’AIN SAFRA—Arab.

Puberulous herb, 1 ft. or more. Leaves linear-oblong, cordate, sessile,
½-2½ in. long. Capit. as above.

Kordofan Prov. (North of Shersha); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500-9,000
ft.).


544 =Geigeria acaulis= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._

Low, tufted, cottony herb. Leaves alt., crowded, linear or oblong, 1-3½
in. long., overtopping the solitary heterog. yellow capit. Fem. fl.
ligulate, 3-dentate; hermaphr. fl. tubular, 5-fid.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=G. alata= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._ GATGAT (Baggara) & RIHAN (N.
Kordn.)—Arab; HASHUK—Hadendowa; DOSH—Rashida.

Glabrous herb, ½-1 ft. high; branches winged. Leaves opp., oval-oblong,
decurrent, 1-3½ in. long, glandular-punctate. Cap. heterog., yellow,
10-12 flowered, bracteate, solitary in forks of branches. Fl. as above.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Khartoum Prov. (J. Royan); Kassala Prov. (Um
Adam); Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=G. Macdougalii= _S. Moore._

Annual, about 1 in. high. Leaves sessile, oblanceolate or lanceolate-
oblanceolate, mucronate, 1 in long, ciliolate, gland-dotted. Heads small
terminal and axillary. Bracts 4-seriate.

White Nile Prov.


545 =Anisoppapus africanus= _O._ & _H._

Erect puberulous herb, 3-4 ft. Leaves deltoid, hastate, crenate, 1-3 in.
long, alternate. Capit. heterog., yellow, ½-1 in. wide excluding ligules
of fem. fl. which are spreading and 3-dentate; hermaphr. fl. 5-toothed.
Infl. corymbose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=A. chinensis= _Hk._ & _Arn._

Erect pubescent herb. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, obtusely dentate, 1½-2½
in. long; petioles dilating at base. Capit. as above.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


546 =Ambrosia maritima= _Linn._

Annual, woody below, hairy, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves alt., ovate,
bipinnatipartite, 1-3 in. long. Capit. white, monœcious, in dense
spikes, male at the top, female below (or sessile in upper axils), in
terminal corymbose panicles; male fl. white, tubular, 5-fid; fem. fl.:
cor. 0 but involucre closed over the fruit, spinose or tubercled.

Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (from Sennar northwards,
on river banks).


547 =Xanthium strumarium= _Linn._ KHARAQ EL BAHR—Arab.

Puberulous annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves deltoid, 3-5-lobed, coarsely
dentate, 1-6 in. broad, cordate; petiole ½-5 in. long Capit. yellow
monœcious; male globose in terminal clusters; female 2-flowered
axillary; invol. of fem. heads prickly.

Khartoum and Blue Nile Provinces.

The seeds yield an oil. The fruit is considered efficacious for small-
pox, also useful for diseases of the bladder. Not eaten by cattle. In
the Fung “Mayas,” after all the grass has been eaten, masses of this
plant form vivid green patches.


548 =Siegesbeckia orientalis= _Linn._

Pubescent, widely branched annual, 1-3 ft. Leaves alt., deltoid-ovate to
lanceolate, 1½-5 in. long, dentate. Capit. heterog., yellow, in
dichotomous leafy panicles; fem. fl. ligulate, toothed, inconspicuous;
hermaphr. fl. tubular, 3-5, dentate.

Red Sea Prov.


549 =Enhydra fluctuans= _Lour._

Aquatic herb, 1-2 ft. high; stem rooting and creeping. Leaves opp.,
linear to lanceolate, 1-3 in. long, base subhastate, petiole dilated.
Capit. heterog., whitish or greenish, axillary. Fem. fl. inconspicuous;
hermaphr. fl. 5-toothed; invol. bract 4, leafy, ovate.

Mongalla Prov. (below Bor).

The leaves are regarded as laxative, antibilious and useful in diseases
of the skin and nervous system.


550 =Eclipta alba= _Hassk._ TAMR EL GHANAM (Khartoum), BILTIK (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Arab; HRERVA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Scabrid herb, ½-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., lanceolate, up to 5 in. long.
Capit. heterog., on peduncles 1-3 together; fem. fl. white, ligulate,
small; hermaphr. fl. tubular, 4-dentate.

Berber Prov. (Atbara, on river banks); Khartoum Prov.; Darfur Prov.;
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé, Jur Ghattas).

Yields a black stain which elsewhere is used in tattooing.


551 =Sclerocarpus africanus= _Jacq._

Hispid herb, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves mostly alt., ovate to ovate-
lanceolate, serrate, 1-6 in. long. Capit. heterog., solitary, over-
topped by involucral bracts; ray fl. 3, neuter, yellow; disk fl.
hermaphr., 10-12, tubular, 4-5-toothed.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.


552 =Blainvillea rhomboidea= _Cass._

Branched scabrid annual, 1-3½ ft. high. Leaves alt. or opp., lanceolate,
crenate-serrate, up to 3 in. long. Capit. heterog. 1-2 together, forming
with others a panicled leafy cyme. Fem. fl. ligulate, 2-3 dentate,
yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Fung Prov. (Saoleil); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.


=B. Prieureana= _DC._

Hispid branched herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp. or alt., ovate-
lanceolate to lanceolate, 3-nerved, 1-5 in. long. Inflor. much as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Sinum).


553 =Aspilia multiflora= _O._ & _H._

Scabrid herb. Leaves opp., ovate-lanceolate, up to nearly 2 in. long.
Capit. heterog., yellow, in lax, leafy panicles; ray fl. neuter, ligule
rarely exceeding ½ in. in length; disk fl. hermaphr.

Blue Nile Prov.


=A. Schimperi= _O._ & _H._

Erect annual 1-3 ft. high, scantily hairy. Leaves opp., ovate-lanceolate
or lanceolate, acuminate, connate at the base, 1-5 in. long. Capit.
heterog. yellow, in lax, leafy cymes; ray fl. neuter, ligule 1/5 in.
long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=A. latifolia= _O._ & _H._

Hispid herb, 1½-4 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate, serrulate, 3-nerved near
the base, 1½-5 in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow, solitary on long
peduncles, terminal or in forks of branches; ray florets 20, ligule
under ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas and Niamniam-land, Nganye).

The pounded leaves and flowers act as a powerful styptic.


=A. Kotschyi= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._

Scabrid and hispid annual, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves opp., lanceolate or oval
to linear, subamplexicaul, 1-8 in. long. Capit. heterog., deep maroon-
coloured, solitary or few together, overtopped by involucrate leaves.
Ligule ¼-½ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.
(J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).


554 =Wedelia abyssinica= _Vatke._

Undershrub, 3 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate or oblong-lanceolate,
scabrous, 3-nerved, 1½-3 in. long. Capit. heterog., 1-3 at ends of
branches; fem. fl. ligulate, orange; hermaphr. yellow.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


555 =Melanthera abyssinica= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._

Scabrid branched herb, 2 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate-lanceolate,
serrate, amplexicaul, 1½-4 in. Capit. heterog., yellow in corymbose
cymes; ray fl. neuter; ligule 2-3-fid; disk fl. tubular, hermaphr.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=M. pungens= _O._ & _H._

Scabrid herb, 4 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate, upper lanceolate,
acuminate, shallow-dentate, up to 6 in. long. Capit. as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=M. Brownei= _Schultz Bip._

Scabrid semi-woody herb, 2-10 ft. high. Leaves opp., deltoid-ovate,
sometimes 3-lobed acuminate, dentate, 2-6 in. long. Capit. heterog.
yellow, in lax terminal cymes; ray fl. female, ligulate, disk fl.
hermaphr.

Bahr El Jebel (Sudd); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


556 =Verbesina (Ximenesia) enceloides= _Cav._

Hoary annual, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves mostly alt., deltoid to oblong,
dentate, 1-6 in. long; petiole ½-2 in., winged auriculate. Capit.
heterog., yellow, on peduncles, up to 8 in. long, forming a loose cyme.
Ray fl. fem., ligule deeply toothed.

Khartoum, Blue Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


557 =Spilanthes Acmella= _Linn._

Annual up to 1 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate, up to 2 in. long. Capit.
usually heterog., usually yellow, solitary on long peduncles; ray flor.
1 seriate, usually present, ligule small or 0.

Fung Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land:
Nabambisso River).

The whole plant, especially the flower-heads, is very acid and has a
hot, burning taste. It is used for toothache and is considered by
natives a powerful stimulant.


558 =Guizotia Schultzii= _Hochst._

Scabrous herb, 2-4 ft. Leaves opp., narrow-elliptic, serrate, cordate,
amplexicaul, often connate, 1-8 in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow, in
corymbose cymes, pedicels up to 5 in.; fem. fl. 1-seriate; hermaphr. fl.
glandular-hairy.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 6,500-9,300 feet); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-land).


=G. Schimperi= _Sch. Bip._

Pubescent herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves opp., elliptic-ovate denticulate,
cordate-amplexicaul, ½-4 in. long. Capit. much as above, but cor. of
hermaphr. fl. subglabrous.

Darfur Prov. (Zalingei).


559 =Coreopsis linearifolia= _O._ & _H._

Nearly glabrous herb, 4-5 ft. high. Leaves opp., linear, denticulate
scabrous, 2-6 in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow, on peduncles 1-4 in.,
in a lax corymbose cyme. Ray fl. ligulate, fem. or neuter.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Steppes near Agada).


=C. chrysantha= _Vatke._

Pallid herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves tripartite; lobes lanceolate or
linear, acutely narrowed at both ends, deeply serrate, scabrid above,
hispid below, ¾-3½ in. by ⅛-1 in.; petioles up to 1¼ in.; sometimes
leaves not lobed, ovate or narrow elliptical. Capit. heterog. on hispid
peduncles in a lax, corymbose cyme, yellow.

Nubia.


=C. abyssinica= _Schultz Bip._

Erect herb, ab. 3 ft. high, scabrid-pubescent above. Leaves opp.,
pinnatisect, 1½-4½ in. long, segments 3-4 pairs, toothed or
subpinnatipartite. Capit. yellow, heterog., ½ in. diam., on pedicels up
to 4 in., in lax corymbose cymes.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=C. guineensis= _O._ & _H._

Nearly glabrous annual, ab. 2 ft. high. Leaves opp., tripartite bilobed
or undivided, divisions of the leaf linear 1-7 in. long. Capit.
heterog., yellow, ½-¾ in. long, on peduncles 2-7 in., in a lax cyme, or
solitary, terminal.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


560 =Bidens pilosa= _Linn._

Annual, up to 5 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate, mostly pinnately-lobed,
blade 1-5 in.; petiole 2½ in. Capit. heterog., tipped with 2-4 barbed,
spinose bristles, in a lax corymbose cyme; ray fl. white, ligulate, fem.
or neuter; disk fl. yellow, hermaphr. Fr. an achene, ab. ½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, Coast); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Kordofan Prov.
(Katul Gambara); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land,
Gurfala); Darfur Prov. (Kulme & J. Marra).


=B. bipinnata= _Schultz Bip._

Very similar to above, but leaves mostly bipinnately lobed. Achenes with
3-4 spinose barbed bristles.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Red Sea Prov.


=B. Schimperi= _Schultz Bip._

Subscabrous herb, up to several feet high. Leaves opp., 2-3 pinnatisect
or more or less 3-fid, 3-6 in. long, with scattered black dots. Capit.
heterog., yellow, in lax corymbose cymes. Ray fl. fem. or neuter; ligule
½ in. long. Achenes with 2, sometimes 3 setæ.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin to Khor Tamanib).


561 =Chrysanthellum procumbens= _Pers._

Glabrous procumbent or erect herb, up to 1 ft. high. Leaves alt.,
multifid, up to 1½ in. long; petiole subamplexicaul 1½ in. long. Capit.
heterog., cymose; ray florets fem. ligulate, small.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan
Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf, southwards); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Mongalla Prov.


562 =Cotula anthemoides= _Linn._

Low, hairy, much branched annual. Leaves alt., deeply subbipinnatifid,
⅓-¾ in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow, discoid, solitary terminal; outer
fl. fem., minute, in several rows.

Berber Prov. (Nile Cataract; near J. Gerri); Khartoum Prov.


=C. cinerea= _Del._ SHIA (Port Sudan)—Arab.

Pale green, villose herb, 1-6 in. high. Leaves alt., pinnatifid, obovate
or spathulate in outline, ¼-¾ in. long. Capit. yellow, heterog.,
terminal; fem. fl. few minute or more usually wanting.

Red Sea Prov. (Port Sudan); Kordofan Prov.


=C. Kotschyi= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._ HARR (Khartoum)—Arab.

Hoary prostrate herb, up to 12 in. high. Leaves alt., obovate-
pinnatipartite, ¼-¾ in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow, terminal; fem.
fl. few, minute.

Berber Prov. (Shendi); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov.
(Geteina); Darfur Prov.


=C. abyssinica= _Schultz Bip._

Pilose annual, up to 1 ft. high. Leaves alt., bipinnatipartite, up to 1¼
in. incl. the petiole, which is as long as the blade and half clasping.
Capit. heterog., yellow, on 6 in. long peduncles; fem. fl. in 1 row,
minute.

Upper White Nile.


563 =Gynura cernua= _Benth._

Puberulous annual, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves alt., upper ones auriculate-
amplexicaul, ovate or laciniate-lyrate, irregularly dentate or lobed,
lower ones petiolate. Capit. purple, homog., solitary, terminal, on 6-12
peduncles; invol. bracts 1-seriate; fl. all tubular, some of the outer
with imperfect anthers.

Blue Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-Ghattas & Niamniam-land).


=G. vitellina= _Benth._

Shining herb, 2-6 ft. high. Leaves alt., ovate or lanceolate,
irregularly dentate, 1-4 in. long, auricled at base of petiole. Cap.
yellow, homog., solitary, terminal on peduncles 4-12 in. long, bearing
2-3 bracts; invol. bracts 1-seriate; fl. all tubular, hermaphr.
excepting some outer ones with imperfect anthers.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 3,500 to 9,300 ft.); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=G. crepidioides= _Benth._

Annual 2-3 ft. high. Leaves alt., lyrate-pinnatifid, dentate, 1-10 in.
long. Capit. homog. yellow or with purple tips, in dense or lax
corymbose cymes; invol. bracts 1-seriate; fl. as above.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal (Niamniam-land).


=G. amplexicaulis= _O._ & _H._

Herb 2½-3 ft. high. Leaves alt., obovate-oblong, dentate, amplexicaul,
4-5 in. long. Capit. reddish-orange, homog., 3-4 together in a long-
peduncled cyme; invol. bracts 1-seriate; fl. as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Khor of Bodumo).


564 =Emilia sagittata= _DC._

Annual, ¼-4 ft. high, glaucescent. Leaves alt., sagittate-amplexicaul,
oval-ovate or oblong, 1-4 in. long. Capit. homog., orange, cymose or
subsolitary on 2½ in. long pedicels; invol. bracts 1-seriate; florets
hermaphr.

Fung. Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra:
Wadi Gindi, 7,500 ft.); Upper White Nile Prov.


565 =Notonia Schweinfurthii= _O._ & _H._

Glabrous, fleshy perennial, 1 ft. high. Leaves narrow-elliptic, sessile,
1-2 in. long. Capit. homog., purple, solitary, many-flowered, on 6-8 in.
long bracteate peduncles; invol. bracts 1-seriate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Pongo River).


566 =Senecio arabicus= _Linn._

Annual, ab. 1 ft. high. Leaves alt., pinnatifid or partite, oval in
outline 1-3½ in. long, upper amplexicaul, auriculate. Capit. homog., in
broad corymbose cymes; invol. bracts 1-seriate.

Nubia (Islands of the Nile); Kordofan Prov.


=S. abyssinicus= _Schultz Bip._

Herb, 3-16 in. high. Leaves alt., spathulate, ½-2½ in. long, somewhat
hairy. Capit. heterog., yellow, 4-12 together, cymose; invol. bracts
1-ser.; fem. fl. ligulate.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=S. discifolius= _Oliv._

Annual, 12-15 in. high. Leaves alt., orbicular, ¾-2 in. diam. (upper
ones obovate spathulate), suddenly narrowed into a winged petiole.
Capit. heterog., orange, 1-3 on 3-7 in. long peduncles, terminal; invol.
bracts 1-ser.; fem. fl. ligulate.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).


=S. picridifolius= _DC._

Perennial 1-2 ft. high. Leaves alt., oval-oblong or ovate, auriculate,
toothed, puberulous, 1½-4½ in. long. Capit. homog., 1 or few together,
on 3-6 in. long peduncles; invol. bracts 1-seriate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Papyrus Swamp, Meshra El Rek).


=S. tuberosus= _Schultz Bip._

Glabrous herb 7-18 in. high, with white, fleshy tuberous root 1-3 in.
diam. Leaves alt., elliptic to ovate, coarsely toothed or 3-lobed, 4-8
in. long including petiole. Capit. homog., yellow, 5-flowered, in a
dense subumbelliform cyme. Invol. bracts-seriate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Khor Koki, Matamma).

Root edible.


=S. Schweinfurthii= _O. Hoffm._

Herb. Leaves crowded, linear-oblanceolate, serrate, 4 in. long, shortly
pubescent. Heads few, discoid. Bracts ⅓ in. long, viscid. Pappus longer
than corolla, white.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jurland).


=S.? emilioides= _Schultz._

Glabrous annual, branched from the base. Capit. discoid; invol. bracts
1-seriate.

Fung Prov.


567 =Tripteris Vaillantii= _Decaisne._

Scabrous herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves alt., linear to narrow-elliptic,
dentate to subpinnatifid, 1-4½ in. long, semi-amplexicaul. Capit.
heterog., yellow-purplish, in a lax corymb on 1-7 in. long pedicels;
invol. bracts sub 1-ser.; fem. fl. ligulate; disk fl. tubular, sterile.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, 21° N.L. sea level to 3-4,000 ft., Has Has).


=T. Lordii= _O._ & _H._

Scabrid decumbent or ascending herb, 4-6 in. high. Lower leaves opp.,
upper alt., oval or narrow-elliptic repand-denticulate, 1½-2½ in. long.
Capit. heterog., yellow, solitary or few in a lax cyme; ligule of fem.
fl. ⅙ in. long, linear.

Red Sea Prov. (near Erkowit & Khor Tamanib).


_C. More or less spinescent herbs, sometimes thistle-like. Capitula
either heterogamous (outer florets usually neuter, ligulate or dilated
tubular) or homogamous, hermaphrodite and tubular. Leaves alternate._


568 =Berkheya Spekeana= _Oliv._

Tall, erect, prickly herb. Leaves alt., linear-oblong, semiamplexicaul,
remotely toothed, apiculate at tip, spinose-hispid above, white-
tomentose beneath, 1-6 in. long. Capit. heterog., yellow, 1 in. diam.
excl. ray, solitary or few together; invol. bracts many, spinous
acuminate; ray fl. 1-ser., ligulate, neuter; ligule ab. 1 in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).


569 =Echinops longifolius= _A. Rich._

Erect, thistle-like herbs, ab. 2 ft. high. Leaves linear, amplexicaul-
auriculate, intensely spinose white tomentose beneath, 6-12 in. long.
Capit. 1-flowered collected into a dense globose head; cor. purple;
inner invol. bracts 20-25 lanceolate or spathulate, serrate aculeate.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Bahr El Jebel (Madi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).


=E. amplexicaulis= _Oliv._

Erect thistle-like, 4 ft. or more; stems cottony. Leaves pinnately-
lobed, ovate or elliptical, white-tomentose beneath, 3-9 in. long,
spinose-dentate and tipped. Capit. 1-flowered in a dense globose cluster
3-4 in. diam.; fl. pink; inner invol. bracts 20-25, ciliate-spinulose,
linear-lanceolate or subulate, the innermost connate half-way.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Sabbi).


=E. macrochætus= _Fresen._ KWANAB—Hadendowa.

Erect, 3-5 ft. high. Leaves semi-amplexicaul, oblanceolate or
elliptical, up to over 8 in. long, more or less deeply pinnately lobed,
spiny, white-tomentose beneath. Capitula not very numerous in clusters,
1½ in. diam.; inner invol. bracts spathulate, apiculate, ab. 18 in
number, innermost connate into a tube more than half-way up.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Ghulfan); Darfur Prov. (J.
Marra 8-10,000 ft.).


=E. spinosus= _Linn._

Erect, 3-5 ft. high, white-woolly. Leaves sessile, ovate, pinnatisect,
2-8 in. long, spinose-incised; heads about 1 in. long, in clusters 3-4
in. diam.

No locality given (fide Mrs. Crowfoot).


=E. sp.=

Leaves not seen. Heads very large on a cone-like axis, pedicellate,
pedicels covered with very long hairs.

Mongalla Prov. (Donka’s village, Sillitoe No. 202).


570 =Centaurea Calcitrapa= _Linn._ Star-thistle Centaurea.

Scabrid branched herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves from simple to pinnatisect,
lobes linear, denticulate. Capit. heterog. (outer fl. 1-ser. larger and
neuter), solitary, lateral or terminal; invol., bracts glabrous or
arachnoid ending in a spreading, yellowish spine, ¾ to 1¼ in. long with
a few smaller lateral ones; fl. purple.

Kordofan Prov.


=C. senegalensis= _DC._ ABU SHWEIKA (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Coarse scabrid herb, 2 ft. high. Leaves oval, ovate or lanceolate,
apiculate, denticulate, semi-amplexicaul. Capit. ovoid-globose, ½-⅔ in.
thick, solitary, terminal; invol. much as above; fl. purple.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Melit & J. Marra).

The flower-heads are made into a poultice to reduce swellings.


=C. rhizocephala= _O._ & _H._

Erect hirsute herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves oval-oblong, sessile, 3-5 in.
long. Capit. 1-1½ in. long, 3 to 9 together in trichotomous cymes
terminating short radical shoots; invol. bracts ending in 3-5 short
spines; outer fl. white, inner rose-coloured.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi).


=C. papposa= _Schultz Bip._

Leaves ovate-oblong, sessile, scabrid-glandular, 1½ in. long. sharply
denticulate. Heads few. Bracts long-spine-tipped, pectinate at base.

Kordofan Prov. (Takari, south of Rahad).


571 =Carthamus tinctorius= _Linn._ GURDUM or ASFAR, QORTOM (Egypt)—Arab.

Erect, thistle-like herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves ovate-oblong, sessile,
1-3 in. long, spinulose-denticulate. Capit. ab. 1 in. thick, homog.,
solitary or cymose; invol. bracts foliaceous and spinescent (in wild
forms); fl. orange.

Khartoum, Blue Nile and Kordofan Provinces.

Cultivated for the flowers which yield an orange dye, called safflower,
and for the seeds which yield a clear, yellow, esculent oil. Poultry
fatten on the seeds.


=C. leucocaulos= _Sibth._

Glabrous, white-stemmed, prickly herb, 1-1½ ft. high. Leaves pinnatifid,
1-4 in. long, lobes ovate ending in a sharp spine. Capit. terminating
the end branches; inner invol. bracts lanceolate.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Soturba, 22° N.L.).


572 =Dicoma tomentosa= _Cass._

Cottony erect herb, 6-24 in. high. Leaves narrow-elliptic or spathulate,
½-2½ in. long. Capit. homog., ab. 14 fl., on short axillary branches and
terminal; invol. bracts lanceolate with 1 spine, arachnoid or cottony;
fl. white or pale yellow.

Fung Prov. (Sheik Talha); Kordofan Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol).

The plant is used as a febrifuge, especially in fevers after childbirth.


=D. sessiliflora= _Harv._

Silvery cottony rigid herb, ab. 2 ft. high. Leaves narrow-elliptic, 3½-8
in. long. Capit. homog., sessile, on short lateral branches and
terminal, solitary or few together in dense cymes; invol. bracts
lanceolate with a sharp, pointed tip; fl. pale-yellow.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Abu Gurun).


573 =Hochstetteria Schimperi= _DC._

Tall, angular-branched herb. Leaves oval, with narrowly-winged petiole,
½-2 in. long, minutely crenate. Capit. homog.; pedunculate, terminal;
invol. bracts spiny, lanceolate, subtended by shorter foliaceous bracts.

Red Sea Prov. (21°-22° N.L.).


_D. Acaulescent herb. Capitula solitary on scapes, heterogamous; ray
florets ligulate, female; disk florets bilabiate, hermaphrodite._


574 =Gerbera abyssinica= _Schultz Bip._

Cottony herb; leaves oval, sinuous denticulate, 1-4 in. long. Petiole up
to 1 in. long. Scapes 1-3, up to 15 in. long, shaggy. Capit. ab. 1 in.
long, ligules longer than invol.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


_E. Herbs, usually with milky sap. Capitula homogamous; florets all
ligulate, hermaphrodite, or a few barren; ligule 5-toothed. Leaves
alternate or radical._


575 =Scolymus maculatus= _Linn._

Coarse spinescent herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves alt., oblong, sinuous-
pinnatifid, decurrent, 2-3 in. long; radical leaves spathulate, spinose
dentate. Capit. yellow, sessile, terminal or lateral; invol. bracts
linear-lanceolate, pointed; outer ligules black-pilose.

Kordofan Prov.


576 =Crepis Ruepellii= _Schultz Bip._

Small herb, up to 8 in. high. Leaves rosulate, oblanceolate,
denticulate, ¾-4 in. long. Capit. yellow, in lax open cymes; inner
invol. 8, lanceolate, glandular hairy.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 6,500-9,000 ft.).


577 =Lactuca taraxacifolia= _Schum._ & _Thonn._ KINTARA (Khartoum)—Arab.

Glaucescent herb, 2-6 ft. high. Leaves saw-toothed, 6 in. long by 4 in.
broad; stem-leaves amplexicaul, decurrent. Capit. yellow, 20 fl., in
panicled racemose cymes; inner invol. bracts 5.

Red Sea Prov.; Khartoum & Fung Provinces.


=L. goræensis= _Schultz Bip._

Erect glaucescent herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves pinnatifid, often saw-
toothed, up to 8 by 4 in., amplexicaul, lowest decurrent. Capit. yellow
in panicled racemose cymes; inner invol. bracts 8.

Kordofan Prov.


=L. Schweinfurthii= _O._ & _H._

Herb, 5 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate or lanceolate-oblong, denticulate,
up to 8 in. long, semi-amplexicaul. Capit. 5-flowered, in an elongated
cyme; inner invol. bracts 5.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


=L. capensis= _Thunb._

Glabrous herb, ½-2 ft. Leaves linear or oblong, the lower toothed-
pinnatifid or entire, 3-5 in. long, the upper entire, amplexicaul-
sagittate. Capit. white, yellow or blue, 11 fl., in panicled cymes.

Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=L. abyssinica= _Fresen._

Robust glabrous herb, 3 ft. or more high. Lower leaves pinnatifid or
sinuate-dentate, upper l. linear-lanceolate, amplexicaul-auricled, up to
6 in. long. Capit. violet, fl. 10-13, in elongated cymes.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,500-9,000 ft.); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land & Niamniam-land).


=L. virosa= _Linn._

Herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves obovate-oblong, toothed, sagittate-
amplexicaul, 1-4 in. long. Capit. yellow, fl. ab. 11, in a spreading
cyme.

Kordofan Prov.


=L. sativa= _Linn._ Lettuce.

Generally cultivated.


578 =Heterachæna massaviensis= _Fresen._

Branched annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves toothed or pinnatifid, auricled-
amplexicaul, 1½-4½ in. long. Capit. blue, fl. 9-10, in panicled
corymbose cymes.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


579 =Picridium tingitanum= _Desf._ MALOT, MALAITA (Gezira)—Arab; AMAGAK
(Renk)—Dinka.

Erect annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate to obovate, undivided or
pinnatifid, denticulate, sessile, cordate, 1½-6 in. long. Capit. yellow,
on long peduncles dilated at the top; invol. bracts broadly ovate.

Nubia; Blue Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Renk); Darfur Prov.
(Kulme & J. Marra).


580 =Sonchus oleraceus= _Linn._

Coarse annual, 1½-3 ft. high. Leaves oval or oblong, undivided, toothed
or pinnatifid, 1-6 in. long, denticulate, upper ones sessile-
amplexicaul. Capit. yellow, many-flowered, in corymbose cymes.

Nubia; Blue Nile Prov.

The roots and leaves are used, in infusion, as a tonic and febrifuge.


=S. Bipontini= _Aschers._

Glabrous perennial; 2-4 ft. high. Leaves linear, denticulate, up to 6
in. long, auricled, sessile. Capit. yellow, fl. ab. 20, in corymbose
cymes; inner invol. bracts ab. 8, linear, ultimately reflexed.

Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov. (Singa); White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur-land); Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).

Is eaten as spinach.


=S. cf. S. Bipontini= _Aschers._ =var. pinnatifida= _O._ & _H._

Darfur Prov.


=S. cornutus= _Hochst._

Erect herb, ½-2 ft. high. Leaves crowded near the base, obovate,
spathulate or pinnately-toothed, sessile, 1-8 in. long.

Capit. yellow, fl. 20-27, in lax cymes; inner invol. bracts 8-10,
obtuse.

North Sudan (between Suakin & Berber); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung
Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol, Wad Shellai).


=S. prenanthoides= _O._ & _H._

Glaucous perennial, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves more crowded at the base,
subentire, pinnatifid-dentate, lower ones amplexicaul, upper ones
sessile, auricled. Capit. yellow, 20-25 flowered, cymose; inner invol.
5, scarious.

Kordofan Prov.


                             =LOBELIACEÆ.=


581 =Lobelia inconspicua= _Rich._

Dwarf annual, ½-1½ in. high. Leaves alt., small, oval to round. Fl.
solitary, axillary, longer than leaves. Cor. 2-lipped, upper 2-lobed,
lower 3-fid; st. 5, filaments united at top, 2 lower anthers bearded.
Fruit a capsule.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=L. sp.=

Herb, leafy towards the base. Leaves lanceolate, acute, 2 in. long, ¾
in. broad, serrate and densely ciliate. Flowers few, cymose. Calyx lobes
⅙ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=L. sp. near L. senegalensis= _A. DC._

Much branched slender herb. Leaves narrowly lanceolate serrate, about 1
in. long, glabrous. Flowers on long slender pedicels, 1¼ in. in fruit.
Calyx-lobes about 1/12 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=L. trierarchi= _R. Good._ sp. nov.

Herb. Leaves linear, denticulate, 1-1½ in. long, glabrous. Flowers few,
lax, pale blue, ⅓ in. long. Calyx-lobes 1/12 in.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 5,000-9,000 ft.).


                            =CAMPANULACEÆ.=


582 =Lightfootia sp.=

Erect, slender but rigid herb. Leaves lanceolate, with wavy denticulate
margins, ⅔ in. long. Flowers shortly pedicellate. Fruit obconic, 1/10
in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=L. abyssinica= _Hochst._

Shrubby perennial, ab. 2 ft. high. Leaves alt., lanceolate, 1½-3 in.
long. Fl. small, in narrow, cymose, branched panicles, 1 ft. or more
long. Cor. deeply 5-lobed, ¼ in. long. Stamens 5, free, filaments
dilated at base. Capsule subglobose, 5-ribbed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


583 =Wahlenbergia etbaica= _Vatke._

Annual, 10 in. high, hispid below. Leaves alternate, ovate-lanceolate, 2
in. long. Fl. small, white, terminal or lateral, distant. Cor. lobes 5,
short and broad; stamens 5, free; capsules 5-valved.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Soturba).


584 =Sphenoclea zeylanica= _Gærtn._

Glabrous annual, 1-4 ft. high; stem fleshy. Leaves alt., linear-
lanceolate, 1-6 in. long. Fl. small, greenish-yellow, in dense bracteate
spikes, 1-3 in. long; cor. campanulate, 3-lobed; anthers free; capsule
depressed globose.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Upper White Nile Prov. (Kio); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Shambé, Niamniam-land: Atasilla River).


585 =Campanula dimorphantha= _Schwfth._

Pubescent annual, 6-9 in. high. Leaves alt., crenulate-dentate, ovate to
linear-lanceolate, 1 in. long. Fl. dimorphic, fertile ones minute,
apetalous, cymose, sterile ones solitary, ½ in. long; cor. blue; stigma
3-5-fid. Capsule crowned by persistent calyx lobes.

Nubia (Farek); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra).


=C. rigidipila= _Steud._ & _Hochst._

Perennial herb, 6-12 in. long, with long rigid hairs. Leaves crowded,
elliptic-lanceolate to obovate, ¼-1 in. long. Fl. blue, solitary and
terminal, 5-merous, ab. ½ in. diam.; stigma 3-5-fid; capsule as above.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 6,500-9,000 ft.).


                             =GENTIANACEÆ.=


586 =Belmontia sp.=

Tiny herb, 3 in. high. Leaves very small, opposite. Flowers on long
stalks, white.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


587 =Faroa pusilla= _Baker._

Dwarf herb, ab. 1½ in. high. Leaves elliptic to lanceolate, ¾-1 in.
long, lower in a rosette, cauline opposite. Fl. minute, white, 4-merous,
in dense terminal or axillary clusters. Capsule small, subglobose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


588 =Enicostema littorale= _Blume._

Herb, 4-8 in. high. Leaves opp., linear or lanceolate, ¾-3 in. long,
sessile. Fl. in axillary clusters along the stem, minute, 5-merous.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (towards Takale).

Possesses much bitterness and is used as a stomachic. It is also tonic
and laxative.


589 =Canscora decussata= _Roem._ & _Schultes._

Erect herb with 4-winged stem. Leaves opp., lanceolate, ½ in. long.
Cymes lax, terminal; cor. white or pale pink, small, lobes 4; stamens 4,
1 perfect. Capsule ¼-in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).

The plant is a laxative and alterative, much praised as a nervine tonic.


=C. diffusa= _R. Br._

Erect herb with 4-angled stems, ½-2 ft. high, less robust than above.
Leaves opp.; upper ovate, acute, short, lower narrowed to base, ⅓-1½ in.
long. Fl. numerous, in a lax, cymose panicle; cor. pink, small; st.
unequal. Capsule small.

Nubia; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Kuddu).


590 =Neurotheca loeselioides= _Oliv._

Small annual with 4-angled stem. Leaves opp., lower lanceolate or ovate-
lanceolate, ⅓-¾ in. long, upper linear to lanceolate, shorter. Fl.
solitary, rarely 2, in each axil; calyx 8-ribbed, ⅙ in.; cor. pale blue,
ab. ¼ in. long; lobes 4, short; st. 4, unequal. Capsules small.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


591 =Limnanthemum niloticum= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Aquatic herb; stems erect or runner-like with alt. or sub-opp. leaves or
resembling petioles (false petioles). Leaves orbicular with a deep sinus
at base, 1-4 in. diam.; false petiole bearing a cluster of 4-8 fl. a
little below the leafblade; cor. yellow; tube with 5 tufts of hair at
the middle, lobes long ciliate. Fr. subglobose, 7-10 seeded.

White Nile Prov. (near Abba Island); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land,
Jur-land, etc.).


592 =Swertia cf. S. abyssinica= _Hochst._

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 9,000 ft.).


                             =PRIMULACEÆ.=


593 =Anagallis arvensis= _Linn._ SABUNGHEYT, AIN EL JENEL & LUBBUN—Arab.
The Common Pimpernel.

Diffuse glabrous herb. Leaves opposite, sessile, ovate or elliptic-
lanceolate. Fl. solitary, axillary, red, rose or blue, 5-merous; capsule
globose, splitting transversely round the middle.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Khors Gwob & Tamanib, Erkowit & Has Has); Fung
Prov.

The plant is used in cerebral affections, leprosy, hydrophobia, dropsy,
etc. Said to be poisonous to dogs.


594 =Samolus Valerandi= _Linn._

Glabrous herb, up to 3 ft. high, with radical and cauline obovate
leaves. Fl. in terminal and axillary panicles, small, white, 5-merous;
stamens nearly sessile in cor. tube; capsule 5-valved.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


                            =PLUMBAGINACEÆ.=


595 =Statice axillaris= _Forsk._ Sea Lavender.

Low, seaside undershrub. Leaves alt., oblanceolate to spathulate,
fleshy, 1-2 in. long; flowering-stem ½-1 ft. high. Fl. purple and pink,
in unilateral bracteate panicled spikes.

Red Sea Prov. (Littoral).


596 =Plumbago zeylanica= _Linn._ TERMIS—Hadendowa.

Scandent undershrub. Leaves alt., ovate-lanceolate, 1½ to 4 in. long.
Fl. in terminal spikes; calyx tubular 5-toothed, covered with stalked
viscous glands; cor. white, salver-shaped; tube exserted; capsule
membranous, enclosed by persistent calyx.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.
(valleys near Turra); Nuba Mts. Prov. (El Mareikib); Darfur Prov. (J.
Burkin: Suruj District & 35 m. N.E. of El Fasher); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Bongo-land: Dukuttu & Niamniam-land).

It is cultivated in gardens as an ornamental plant. The root is said to
have vesicant and tonic properties. In the Congo the macerated leaves
and lime juice are used for blisters.


                            =PLANTAGINACEÆ.=


597 =Plantago lanceolata= _Linn._

Herb. Leaves lanceolate in a radical rosette. Peduncles long, slender;
heads globose or oblong; bracts ovate, as long as calyx; sepals 4, 2
outer hairy; cor. lobes 4, ovate, spreading; st. 4, twice as long as
cor.; anthers versatile. Caps. 2-seeded.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.L.).


=P. stricta= _Schousb._

Herb, 6-12 in. high. Leaves opp. or whorled, narrowly linear. Heads many
to a stem, globose, on ascending peduncles; bracts ovate, longer than
calyx; sepals 4, oblong, ⅛ in. long; cor. lobes small, ovate; st. 4,
short; caps. 2-seeded.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.L.); Between Atbara & Red Sea.


=P. ciliata= _Desf._

Herb, about 1½ in. high, with radical obovate-oblanceolate acute leaves
softly woolly all over. Peduncles half as long as the leaves, about ¾
in.; heads oblong or ellipsoid, ⅓-½ in. long; bracts ovate.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.L.).


                           =HYDROPHYLLACEÆ.=


598 =Hydrolea floribunda= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Branched riverside herb. Leaves alt., linear, ½-2½ in. long. Fl. in
dense cymose, 6-8 in. long panicles, 5-merous; cor. blue; lobes ¼ in.
long; filaments dilated at base into 2 upcurved auricles. Capsule
ellipsoid, 1/7 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Dar Fertit, Banks of the Jur River).


=H. graminifolia= _A. W. Bennett._

Marsh herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves alt., linear, 2-3 in. long. Flowers
corymbose, cymose panicles 3-8 in. long; cor. blue, lobes ¼ in. long;
stamen filaments dilated to a deltoid-ovate base. Capsule globose or
ellipsoid, ⅙ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Badari’s).


=H. macrosepala= _A. W. Bennett._

Marsh herb, 8-24 in. high. Leaves alt., lanceolate to linear, 1-2 in.
long. Panicles lax, few-flowered, 3-12 in. long; sepals cordate-ovate, ¼
in. long, enlarged in fruit; cor. blue, shorter than calyx. Capsule ⅙
in., subglobose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


                             =BORAGINACEÆ.=


599 =Cordia abyssinica= _R. Br._ AZANAYA (Baggara), TUMBAREIB (N.
Kordn.), INDERAB, or INDERAB ENTAYA (Fung), GAMBIL & GIMBIL
(Gallabat)—Arab; KWAKELANG (Dilling), ZAN (Rashad-Talodi) & KUII (J.
Eliri)—Nuba; BANJAM—Hameg.

Medium-sized to large tree. Leaves alt., ovate or suborbicular, up to 7
in. long. Cymes scorpioid (as in all this family) forming a terminal
panicle; calyx tubular, 10-furrowed; cor. white, funnel-shaped, ¾ in.
long; style twice forked; fruit ovoid, ½ in. diam., smooth.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: near Gendua River); Blue Nile Prov. (near Abu
Shendy); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (Bara); Darfur Prov. (J.
Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé & Deim Zobeir).

Heartwood yellowish brown, polishes well, known in Khartoum as Sudan
Teak and used for cabinet work. Fruit edible.


=C. Holstii= _Gürke._

Tree, 20 ft. high. Leaves alt., suborbicular, subcordate, 3-5 in. long,
densely yellow-tomentose beneath. Cymes 3-5 flowered, in lax terminal
panicles; cor. white, ¾ in. long; calyx 4-5 toothed, shallowly
10-furrowed; stamens 4-5; style twice-forked.

Fung Prov. (Roseires).


=C. ovalis= _R. Br._

Shrub or small tree; outer bark crustaceous, peels off exposing young
green-coloured bark. Leaves ovate to suborbicular, 2-3 in. long, reddish
pubescent beneath. Panicles terminal, dense, shorter than leaves; calyx
irregularly toothed, not furrowed, ¼ in.; cor. 4-5 lobed, nearly ½ in.
long; style bipartite nearly to base.

Darfur Prov. (J. Serg); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Gigging).


=C. crenata= _Del._ INDERAB—Arab; BIZU—Hameg.

Low tree. Leaves alt., obovate-cuneate, 2-3 in. long, crenate or upper
half entire. Cymes few-flowered; calyx tubular-campanulate, not sulcate,
silky inside; cor. ½ in. long; style bipartite. Fr. ovoid, ½ in. long on
enlarged, woody, crenate calyx.

Blue Nile Prov. (near Sheikh Talha); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Fertangul).


=C. Rothii= _Roem._ & _Schultes._ MUNDERAB (N. Kordn.), INDERAB &
INDERAB GIMBIL (Baggara) & GIMBIL (White Nile)—Arab; KUGULI
(Dilling)—Nuba; CHAWDAW & SHADASHU—Bari; KAIT (L. Powendael), AKOIT
(Bor), KIAT or SHAT or SHAT-AKOG (Kenissa), AKOG (Renk) & AKOSH
(Kaka)—Dinka; BIZU—Hameg; NIOT or NYUAT—Nuer; GOI—Shilluk.

Small tree. Leaves subopp., oblanceolate or oblong, up to 3 in. long.
Cymes terminal; cor. white, ¼ in. long; style arms club-shaped. Fruit
ovoid, orange, on saucer-shaped enlarged calyx.

Throughout the greater part of the Sudan.

Heartwood brown, slightly scented like Sandal wood and used as a
substitute for it. The small orange berry has a sweet pulp and is eaten.
The bast yields a strong fibre. A gum exudes from wounds.


600 =Ehretia Braunii= _Vatke._

Shrub or small tree with grey striate bark. Leaves alt., oval or
obovate-oblong, emarginate, 1 in. long. Fl. in scorpioid cymose
panicles; cor. white, tipped purple, ¼ in. long, lobes and stamens 4-7;
style bifid. Fr. a globose drupe.

Mongalla Prov.


=E. Stuhlmannii= _Gürke._ OWI—Bari.

Small tree. Leaves alt., up to 4 in. long and 2¼ in. broad, oval, acute
or subacuminate, rough above, velvety pubescent beneath. Cymes long-
peduncled in axils of upper leaves; fl. 5-merous; cor. tube minute,
lobes reflexed, white; stamens long-exserted; style 2-lobed to the
middle. Drupe small, globose.

Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé to Gigging).


601 =Coldenia procumbens= _Linn._ YAKADI—Bari.

Procumbent hairy herb. Leaves alt., oblong, crenate, plicate, 1 in.
long, upper smaller. Fl. solitary, axillary, or upper ones in secund
spikes, 4-merous; cor. ¼ in. long, 4-lobed. Fr. mitre-like, depressed-
globose, ⅙ in. diam., glandular-hairy.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.
(Jebelein); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Rashad); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas); Mongalla Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

Equal parts of the dry plant and fœnu-greek seeds, rubbed to a fine
powder and applied warm to boils, quickly causes them to suppurate. The
fresh leaves, ground up, are applied to rheumatic swelling.


602 =Heliotropium supinum= _Linn._ GHUBEYRA—Arab.

Hairy decumbent herb. Leaves opp. or alt., oval or oblong, crenate, up
to 1½ in. long. Fl. in simple or forked scorpioid spikes, 5-merous,
small. Fruit of 1-2 nutlets, brown, enclosed in persistent, hairy calyx.

Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile
Prov. (Salati); Kordofan Prov. (Hogel).


=H. undulatum= _Vahl._ GHAREIR (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Bristly herb. Leaves alt., oblong to lanceolate, 2½ in. long, undulate.
Spikes many, short, dense scorpioid; fl. minute, 5-merous. Fr. globose,
sub-2-winged, nutlets 4.

Red Sea, Khartoum, Blue Nile, White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


=H. rariflorum= _Stocks._

Woody perennial, white tomentose. Leaves alt., linear, small, sessile,
bristly-hairy. Spikes 3-5 flowered; fl. minute; nutlets 4, hispid.

Red Sea & Mongalla Provinces.

Administered externally and internally for snake-bite.


=H. strigosum= _Willd._

Perennial with appressed white bristly hairs. Leaves alt., linear or
linear-lanceolate, up to 1¼ in. long. Scorpioid spikes lax, 3 in. long;
fl. minute; nutlets 4.

Red Sea Prov. (from 21° N.L. southwards); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat,
Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol &
Jebelein); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Niamniam lands);
Mongalla Prov.

Used as a laxative or diuretic. The juice is used for snake-bite; as an
application in ophthalmia and also for promoting suppuration of gum-
boils and to hasten healing of wounds and ulcers.


=H. Steudneri= _Vatke._

Woody perennial with dense appressed white hairs. Leaves alt., ovate-
lanceolate, 1¼ in. long. Scorpioid spikes short, dense; fl. 5-merous,
minute; nutlets 4.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=H. longiflorum= _Hochst._ & _Steud._

Woody perennial with appressed white hairs. Leaves alt., lanceolate or
oblong-lanceolate, up to 2-3 in. long. Spikes lax, sometimes up to 6 or
9 in. long; cor. ab. ⅙ in. long, densely pubescent outside; nutlets 4.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib, Erkowit & Wadi Omareg).


=H. zeylanicum= _Lam._ UM MANAKHIR (N. Kordn.), DAFARA (Egypt)—Arab.

Woody perennial. Leaves alt., linear or lin.-lanceolate, 1-3 in. long,
with bulbous-based hairs. Spikes lax, finally 6-9 in. long; cor. ¼ in.
long, lobes 5, caudate-acuminate; nutlets 4.

Red Sea, Khartoum, Blue Nile, & Kordofan Provinces.


=H. indicum= _Linn._

Erect pilose annual. 1-3 ft. high. Leaves opp. and alt., ovate, sinuate,
up to 4 in. long; petiole 2 in. long, narrowly-winged, spikes usually
simple, ab. 5 in. long; cor. 5-lobed, lilac or white. Fr. deeply
2-lobed, each lobe with a short bidentate beak and made up of 2 nutlets.

Fung Prov.


=H. pallens= _Del._

Erect annual, 2 ft. high, branching, grey-woolly. Leaves ovate, up to 2
in. long. Spikes simple or forked in a terminal, sometimes leafy
panicle; cor. white, ¼ in. long; nutlets 4.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Dongola Prov. (Omda); Berber Prov. (El Damer);
Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.
(Sobat mouth); Darfur Prov.


=H. ovalifolium= _Forsk._ RHIMTA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; AGANAMA (Meshra
El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Widely-branched, silky, pubescent herb. Leaves alt., obovate or
elliptic, ⅓-1 in. long. Spikes numerous, dense, finally 2-3 in. long;
calyx minute, 1 lobe broader; cor. small; nutlets 4, hispid.

Halfa Prov.; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.;
Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile & Upper White Nile Provinces (Geteina to
Sobat mouth); Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.


=H. europæum= _Linn._ KEREIRA (Blue Nile) & DUKHAN EL AZABAT—Arab.

Erect herb, with short whitish hairs. Leaves alt., oblong-rhomboidal.
Spikes dense, finally lax and 2 in. long; fl. minute, very hairy;
nutlets 4, rugose.

Blue Nile Prov. (Gezira).

Eaten by goats.


=H. pterocarpum= _Hochst._ & _Steud._

Slender short herb, densely hispid. Leaves alt., oblong, small, crisped
on the margin. Scorpioid spikes short, dense; fl. 5-merous; calyx lobes
free nearly to base, ¼ in. long; cor. small; nuts glabrous, cohering in
pairs, winged.

Red Sea Prov. (near Erkowit).


=H. arbainense= _Fresen._

Short, much branched perennial with soft whitish hairs. Leaves alt.,
ovate or oblong, small. Spikes dense, finally 2-3 in. long; calyx
glandular-hairy; cor. tube exserted. Nutlets 4, rugose, glabrous.

Coast of Nubia.


603 =Trichodesma physaloides= _A. DC._

Tuberous-rooted herb, 1-2 ft. high, hirsute or glabrous. Leaves usually
opp., sessile, ovate-lanceolate or lanceolate, 1½-4 in. long, with white
tubercles, especially on upper surface. Panicle cymose, terminal, lax;
calyx at first ½ in. long, subglobose, 1 in. long in fruit; cor. up to
1½ in. diam., white or blue, or white with blue spots in the throat, or
blue with yellow spots; anthers densely pilose on back. Nuts 4.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Deim Zubeir & Mattu-land).


=T. africanum= _R. Br._ HARRĪSH (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Herb, up to 3 ft. high. Leaves opp. or alt., ovate or ovate-oblong, up
to 5 in. long, with scattered white bulbous-based hairs on both
surfaces. Panicle many-flowered, terminal; fl. 5-merous; cor. blue, with
5 purple spots in the throat, under ½ in. long; anthers with apical
twisted horns; nutlets 4, scabrid, spiny.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Ashat); Khartoum Prov. (J. Royan); Kordofan Prov.
(North).

The leaves are used as diuretic.


=T. Bentii= _Baker_ & _C. H. Wright._

Densely hispid herb, 1 ft. high. Leaves opp., ovate, 2½ in. long,
bulbous-based hairs added above to the others. Cymes panicled, terminal;
fl. 5-merous; cor. ⅓ in. diam., lobes triangular-acuminate; anthers
pilose on back, spirally awned.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.L., sea-coast to between 3,000 to 4,000
ft.).


=T. zeylanicum= _R. Br._

Erect herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves opp., or upper alt., oblong-lanceolate,
1-3 in. long, pubescent and with bulbous-based hairs. Cymes lax,
terminal; cor. blue with a white eye, ½ in. diam.; anthers awned;
nutlets 4, ovoid, compressed.

Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro); Darfur (Jebel Marra:
Wadi Gindi 7,300 ft.).

Emollient poultices are made from the leaves.


604 =Cynoglossum Hochstetteri= _Vatke._

Small hispid herb. Leaves alt., oblong, upper sessile. Racemes lax, few-
flowered; fl. 5-merous; corolla blue, small, throat with scales inside;
nutlets 4 with hooked spines on margins and up the centre.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L., from coast-land to 3,000-4,000 ft.; Suakin,
Erkowit, Has Has).


=C. lanceolatum= _Forsk._

Pilose herb, 4-6 ft. high. Leaves alt., oblong-lanceolate to lanceolate,
4-6 in. long, scabrid. Cymes lax, finally 5-6 in. long; fl. 5-merous,
minute; cor. white, sometimes blue tinted; tube enclosed by 5 scales;
nuts 4, covered with hooked spines.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


605 =Echinochilon fruticosum= _Desf._

Densely white hispid dwarf herb. Leaves alt., lanceolate, ¼-½ in. long.
Fl. sessile in axils of upper leaves, cor. blue, 2-lipped; nuts 4.

Nubia (coast-land).


606 =Arnebia hispidissima= _DC._ GHAREIR (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Tufted herb, covered with stiff, white hairs. Stem-leaves lanceolate,
sessile, ½-1 in. long, lower oblanceolate. Spikes dense, finally
elongated; fl. 5-merous; cor. yellow, ab. ½ in. long; nuts 4.

Red Sea Prov. (sea-coast to 3,000-4,000 ft. to Erkowit); Fung Prov.;
Kordofan Prov. (several places); Darfur Prov.


607 =Echium Rauwolfii= _Del._

Hirsute herb, ab. 1 ft. high. Stem-leaves alt., linear-oblong, small,
sessile, covered with white, bulbous-based bristles; radical leaves
oblanceolate, 4-6 in. long. Spikes up to 6 in. long; fl. 5-merous; cor.
blue, funnel-shaped, ¾ in. long; nuts 4, shining.

Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Wad Medani
& Sennar); White Nile Prov. (Geteina).


=E. longifolium= _Del._ KAHALI—Arab.

Densely hirsute herb. Stem-leaves linear-oblong, sessile, small; radical
leaves oblanceolate. Spikes many, lax; cor. blue, ab. ¾ in. long; nuts ⅙
in. diam., ovoid, rugose.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Soturba Mts. 22° N.L.); Dongola Prov. (Wadi
Mahas).


=E. arenarium= _Guss._

Herb with short, upward-pointing bristles. Leaves alt., oblanceolate.
Spikes lax; bracts large, ovate-lanceolate; fl. 5-merous; cor. blue, up
to ½ in. long; nuts 4, tubercled. Blue Nile Prov. (Wad Medani & Sennar);
Fung Prov. (Roseires).


                              =SOLANACEÆ.=


608 =Solanum æthiopicum= _Linn._ GUTA, QUTA, BEGINGAN EL GUTA—Arab.

Tall unarmed herb. Leaves alt. or 2 at a node, oblong, sinuate. Cymes
umbellate, few-flowered; cor. white, 5-7-fid; st. 5-7, anthers conniving
into a cone (as all in this genus), dehiscing by terminal pores. Berry
globose, pale red.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).

The fruit is used for flatulence, the roots also as a remedy for colic.


=S. nodiflorum= _Jacq._ HARSH (Kaka)—Arab.

Herb. Leaves ovate-acuminate, 4 in. long. Cymes umbellate at or above
the nodes, few-flowered; cor. rotate, white, ⅓ in. diam.; anther-pores
large, oblique. Fr. globose, ½ in. diam., black.

Fung Prov. (Roseires & Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.; Upper White
Nile Prov. (Kaka wood station); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land);
Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).

The deep purple juice of the berries can be used as an ink.


=S. nigrum= _Linn._ ENAB EL DIB—Arab.

Pubescent herb, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves obovate to lanceolate, sinuate-
dentate, up to 4 in. long. Cymes extra-axillary, umbellate; cor. rotate,
white, ¼ in. diam.; anther pores terminal, oblique. Berry globose, ¼ in.
diam., black, rarely red or yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib, Soturba mountains, seacoast); Khartoum,
Blue Nile, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.

Berries black, used as a purgative. The whole plant is used as an
article of diet for dropsical patients and those suffering from chronic
inflammation of the liver.


=S. schimperianum= _Hochst._

Shrub, 5 ft. high; young parts stellate-hairy. Leaves ovate, 1 in. long.
Cymes few-flowered; fl. 4-merous; cor. ½ in. diam. Berry globose, nearly
½ in. diam.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Haraza).


=S. albicaule= _Kotschy._

Shrub with recurved spines on the stem; all parts with white stellate
tomentum. Leaves ovate, acuminate, sometimes slightly lobed, 1½ in.
long. Cymes extra-axillary; fl. 5-merous; cor. rotate; lobes nearly ½
in. long. Berry globose, ¼ in. diam.

Red Sea Prov.; Kordofan.


=S. hastifolium= _Hochst._

Undershrub with prickly stem. Leaves hastate and more or less pinnately
lobed, 1½ in. long, stellate-hairy. Fl. lateral and terminal, solitary
or racemose, 5-merous, stellately hairy; cor. lobes under ½ in. long.
Berry globose, ⅓ in. diam.

Blue Nile Prov. (Abu Haraz); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.;
White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla to Bor).


=S. anomalum= _Thonn._

Stellately tomentose shrub, prickly on stems, branches, petioles and
along the midrib of leaves. Leaves solitary or geminate, ovate-oblong,
pinnatifid. Cymes axillary, racemose; fl. 4-merous; cor. white, rotate.
Berry globose, red, nearly ½ in. diam.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Assika River).


=S. aculeatissimum= _Jacq._

Armed undershrub, 1-2 ft. high; spines straight on stems, branches,
upper side of principal nerves and calyx lobes, interspersed in the
younger parts with stiff bristles as also on leaves. Leaves solitary or
geminate, broadly ovate or ovate-cordate, pinnately 5-7 lobed, 4 in.
long; petiole 1 in. long. Cymes extra-axillary, few-flowered; fl.
5-merous; cor. rotate, 1 in. diam., white. Fr. globose, 1 in. diam.,
smooth, orange.

Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).


=S. xanthocarpum var. Schraderi= _Dunal._

Bushy herb armed with straight spines on stems, branches, petiole and
midrib of leaves. Leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate, pinnately 5-9
lobed, up to 5 in. long, stellate-hairy when young. Cymes extra-
axillary, 5-8 flowered; fl. 5-merous; cor. blue-purple, 1 in. diam.
Berry size of a cherry, yellow.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Blue Nile Prov. (Ganneib Assad); Fung Prov.
(Roseires & Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (Mulbes, Abu Haraza & Abu
Felagi); Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land, Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov.


=S. dubium= _Fresen._ GUBEIN (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Bushy, mealy pubescent herb, armed on stem, leaves and calyx. Leaves
alt., upper ones geminate, unequally cordate, ovate or ovate-lanceolate,
wavy-sinuate. Cymes short, few-flowered; fl. 5-merous; cor. violet.
Berry globose, ¼ in. diam., yellow, enclosed in spiny calyx.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba); Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.;
Kordofan Prov. (several places); Darfur Prov. (J. Berkin).

The plant is pounded and put into water in which hides are soaking to
assist the removal of the hair.


=S. incanum= _Linn._ GIBBEIN—Arab; MANIOP—Hadendowa; TELELEH—Bari;
DITAAK (or ATITĀK) (Kenissa)—Dinka.

Tall, woody herb; all parts stellately woolly; branches, leaves and
calyx spiny. Leaves ovate or ovate-elliptic, 5 in. long, sinuate. Fl.
solitary or few together; cor. purple or white, ab. 1 in. long. Fr.
subglobose, 1½ in. diam., yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba to Erkowit); Berber Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Fung
Prov. (near Mashikha & Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid); Darfur
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Gameiza).

The seeds are used for curdling milk. The fruit is said to be edible.


=S. hybridum= _Jacq._

Armed pubescent shrub. Leaves geminate, ovate, sinuate or entire, 3 in.
long. Cymes racemose, umbellate or reduced to a single flower; fl.
5-merous; calyx tube spiny; cor. pale-purple, 1 in. diam. Berry 1 in.
diam., orange-red.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=S. cerasiferum= _Dunal._

Stellate-hairy herb with spines on stem, leaves and calyx. Leaves
oblong, 2½ in. long, pinnately lobed. Cymes racemose; 5-merous; cor.
violet, ¾ in. diam., densely stellate-hairy outside. Berry subglobose,
yellow.

Fung Prov.


=S. Melongena= _Linn._ BEDINGAN—Arab; JUYO—Krej. Egg Plant or Aubergine.

Cultivated for its large purple-black fruit, which is cooked as a
vegetable.


=S. duplosinuatum= _Klotzsch._

Undershrub, 3 ft. high; stem, leaves and calyx spiny and stellate-hairy.
Leaves bi- to tripinnatifid, 8 in. long, 5 in. broad. Cymes racemose,
few-flowered; fl. 5-merous; cor. mauve, 1½ in. diam. Fr. globose, 1½ in.
diam., white, streaked with green.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River).


=S. campylacanthum= _Hochst._

Shrub, 2-5 ft. high, with short recurved spines on stem and midribs of
leaves. Leaves alt., broadly lanceolate to oval, entire or shallowly
sinuate, up to 6 in. long, stellately hairy on both surfaces. Cymes
extra-axillary, few-flowered, 5-merous; cor. lilac, 1 in. diam. Berry
globose, 1 in. diam.

Darfur Prov.


=S. pruinosum var. pilosulum= _Dunal._

Herb; branches white-waxy (pruinose). Leaves rhomboid, cuneate, 2-3 in.
long, hairy beneath. Racemes 6-7 flowered, hairy on peduncles and
flowers; fl. 5-merous: cor. white, under ½ in. diam. Berry size of a
pea.

Fung Prov.


=S. sp.?= HAMASHANAK—Hadendowa.

Unarmed shrub.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


609 =Physalis minima= _Linn._

Villous herb, 1 ft. high. Leaves ovate or subcordate, acuminate, entire
or sinuate-dentate, 1¼ in. long. Fl. solitary, 5-merous; calyx
campanulate, 5-angled, enlarging in fruit to ½ in. diam.; cor. yellow, ¼
in. long. Berry globose, ¼ in. diam.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land);
Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Mbrwole).


=P. angulata= _Linn._ =var.=

Bushy herb with yellow flowers; calyx accrescent in fruit.

Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid).


610 =Capsicum frutescens= _Linn._ SHATTA & FILFIL AHMAR—Arab;
RARIA—Zande. Red Pepper.

Shrubby herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves ovate acuminate, variable in size.
Fl. solitary or in pairs, 5-merous; cor. white or pale yellow. Berry
spindle-shaped, red.

Fung, Bahr El Ghazal & Kordofan Provinces (cultivated).


=C. annuum= _Linn._ FILFIL AHMAR—Arab. Cayenne Pepper.

Much like above. Cor. lobes 5-6, greenish-white. Berry oblong-linear,
under 1½ in. long.

Cultivated in various parts.

Fruit, picked green or when ripe, is used to make sauces. It is also
dried and ground for use like Cayenne pepper.


611 =Lycopersicum esculentum= _Mill._ BANADURO or TOMATUM—Arab.

Tomato Plant.

Cultivated throughout the country.


612 =Withania somnifera= _Dun._ MORGAN, SIM EL FAR, SAKARAN,
FOQQESH—Arab; MEIKA-IS—Hadendowa.

Large bushy or decumbent herb, growing in swampy ground, often on
termite mounds. Leaves ovate or variable, up to 2½ in. long, tomentose.
Fl. 4-6 in axillary fascicles, 5-merous; calyx campanulate, much
enlarged in fruit; cor. pale-green, under ¼ in. long. Berry globose, ¼
in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Sinkat); Kassala Prov.; Dongola Prov. (Merowe);
Fung Prov. (Roseires); Kordofan Prov. (Bara); Darfur Prov.; Upper White
Nile Prov. (Kodok); Bahr El Ghazal & Mongalla Provinces.

The seeds are used to coagulate milk. The root is said to have tonic and
diuretic properties.


613 =Lycium persicum= _Miers._ SAMŪNAT—Rashida; TISHANU—Hadendowa.

Shrub; shortened branches often spiny. Leaves spathulate-obovate or
oblong, ¼-¾ in. long. Fl. solitary, tubular, 5-merous; cor. blue-purple,
¾ in. long. Berries globose, scarlet.

Red Sea Prov.

The scarlet berries are said to be eaten.


614 =Datura Stramonium= _Linn._ SAKARAN—Arab; TARME (Dilling)—Nuba. The
Thorn-apple.

Bushy herb or undershrub. Leaves ovate, coarsely toothed or lobed, up to
9 in. long. Fl. solitary in forks of branches, 5-merous; cor. white, 3-4
in. long, tubular-funnel-shaped. Caps. 2 in. long, echinate, ovoid.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov.; Khartoum
Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dilling).

The seeds are poisonous and a powerful narcotic. The active principles
are Hyoscyamine and a small quantity of Scopolamine.


=D. Metel= _Linn._

More pubescent; flowers larger than above.

Khartoum, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.

Poisonous; similar to _D. Stramonium_.


615 =Hyoscyamus muticus= _Linn._ SAKARAN—Arab.

Stout leafy herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves broadly lanceolate, 4-6 in. long,
entire or dentate; petiole 1½-2½ in. long, winged. Fl. axillary and in
unilateral scorpioid terminal spikes or racemes, 5-merous; calyx
accrescent; cor. greenish-white tipped with purple. Caps. subglobose.

Dongola Province.

A powerful narcotic drug, the toxic principles are Hyoscyamine and
Hyosine.


616 =Nicotiana Tabacum= _Linn._ DUKHĀN—Arab; TABBA—Bongo; TĀB &
TABBO—Dinka; TOL—Nuer; GUNDEH—Zande. Tobacco Plant.

Annual, up to 6 ft. high, viscid all over. Leaves lanceolate to ovate,
lower up to 2 ft. long, amplexicaul. Panicle terminal; fl. 5-merous;
cor. pink, white or pale yellow; tube long. Caps. conical.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper
White Nile Prov. (Sobat); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Darfur
Prov.

Cultivated. The leaves are very imperfectly cured by the natives, and
are very rank and coarse. The plant grows freely and yields heavily.


=N. rustica= _Linn._ DUKHĀN—Arab; DĀ (J. Ghulfan)—Nuba; MASHIR—Bongo.

Differs from above by smaller leaves and greenish-yellow flowers in
closer panicles.

Fung Prov.; Nile Banks (17° N.L.); Kordofan Prov. (Bara); Darfur Prov.;
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Nuba Mts. Prov.

The principal tobacco of the Nile Basin, cultivated for smoking and
chewing. The Nicotine content is low.


617 =Schwenkia americana= _Linn._

Much branched, pubescent herb. Leaves alt., lower ovate and petioled,
upper oblong and sessile, ¾ in. long. Panicle lax, terminal; calyx
5-toothed; cor. pale violet, 5-toothed, 2 upper longer, total length ⅓
in.; stamens 4, didynamous. Caps. subglobose, ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Kutshuk Ali, Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land:
Nabambisso River).

Used as a fish poison on the West Coast.


=S. hirta= _Klotzsch._

Hirsute herb, 2 ft. high. Leaves ovate or oblong, ⅔ in. long. Panicle
large, lax; cor. tubular, under ½ in. long, pale violet or yellow, lobes
equal; st. 2. Caps. ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


                            =CONVOLVULACEÆ.=


618 =Ipomœa verticillata= _Forsk._

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves alt., as in all this order, cordate-ovate, 1-2
in. long, pubescent. Fl. 1-2, on short pedicels, on axillary peduncles;
cor. whitish, subcampanulate, ¼ in. long; midpetaline area well defined
as in all the genus. Capsule globose, ⅓ in. diam., glabrous.

Between Kassala & Goz Regeb; Berber Prov. (Zeidab); Khartoum Prov.
(Burri); Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=I. eriocarpa= _R. Br._

Pubescent twiner. Leaves from cordate-ovate to linear-oblong, 1-5 in.
long. Fl. in sessile axillary clusters, 5-merous; sepals hairy, ¼ in.
long; cor. white, pink or purple, ab. ⅓ in. long. Capsule globose,
hairy, ¼ in. diam.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Berber Prov. (Metemma); Khartoum
Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir); Fung
Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=I. sulphurea= _Hochst._

Trailing herb, pubescent. Leaves elliptic-ovate, obtuse, 1-2 in. long,
usually shallowly cordate. Fl. axillary, clustered; cor. sulphur-yellow,
¼ in. long. Capsule globose, hairy, ¼ in. diam.

Kordofan Prov. (Obeid & Abu Helafi).


=I. curtipes= _Rendle._

Finely pubescent twining herb. Leaves linear-oblong, cordate-ovate
below, 1-2 in. long. Fl. axillary, solitary on ¼ in. pedicel; cor.
purplish, hairy, funnel-shaped, ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=I. blepharophylla= _Hallier f._

Trailing herb with short yellowish spreading hairs. Leaves linear to
lin.-oblong, 1½-3 in. long, margins densely ciliolate. Fl. solitary,
axillary; cor. reddish, funnel-shaped, 2 in. long. Caps. glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post).


=I. coscinosperma= _Hochst._

Trailing, slightly hairy annual. Leaves lin.-lanceolate or
obl.-lanceolate, 1½-2½ in. long. Fl. 1-2, axillary; cor. red, ⅓ in.
long. Capsule glabrous, globose, ¼ in. diam.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov. (near Abu Gerad).


=I. kotschyana= _Hochst._

Pubescent twiner. Leaves orbicular, 1-2 pinnatifid, 1-1½ in. diam. Fl.
solitary axillary; cor. funnel-shaped, ab. ⅓ in. long. Caps. globose,
glabrous, ¼ in. diam., 3-celled.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Barkin, in Suruj Dist.).


=I. cardiosepala= _Hochst._ HANTUD or KHANTUT—Arab; TABĀR—Hadendowa.

Creeping and twining, pilose herb. Leaves cordate, ovate, 1-2 in. long.
Peduncles axillary, 1-3 flowered; fl. 5-merous; 3 outer sepals ovate-
cordate, 2 inner lanceolate, ¼ in. long; cor. purplish, funnel-shaped, ½
in. long. Caps. globose, glabrous, ¼ in. diam., 2-celled; seeds densely
tomentose.

Red Sea Prov.; Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.


=I. mombassana= _Vatke._

Laxly pilose trailing and climbing herb. Leaves ovate, cordate-
sagittate, 1-3 in. long. Fl. axillary, solitary or in few-flowered
cymes; cor. white with purple throat, funnel-shaped, 1-2 in. long;
sepals linear-hastate. Caps. glabrous.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kaka & Meshra El Zeraf woodstations).


=I. cordofana= _Choisy._ TEBR or TIBR (White Nile)—Arab; KARA (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka.

Hairy creeper. Leaves ovate-orbicular, broadly cordate, 1-3 in. long;
petiole 1-2 in. long. Peduncles 1-3 flowered; bracts ovate, foliaceous;
cor. white, funnel-shaped, 1-2 in. long. Caps. globose, ⅓ in. diam.

Blue Nile, White Nile & Upper White Nile Provinces (J. Arashkol, El
Dueim to Meshra El Zeraf); Kordofan Prov.


=I. pileata= _Roxb._

Pilose twiner. Leaves cordate-ovate, ab. 2 in. long. Fl. enclosed in a
large boat-shaped bract; cor. cylindrical, tube 1 in. long; limb
spreading, 1 in. diam. Caps. globose, small.

Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=I. chloroneura= _Hallier f._ LUAE (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Erect branching herb with dense white and yellow hairs. Leaves
lin.-lanceolate to oval, 1-2 in. long. Fl. in small dense heads, outer
bracts foliaceous; cor. white or pale-yellow, funnel-shaped, under ½ in.
Caps. globose; seeds fawny, silky-pubescent.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri).


=I. involucrata= _P. Beauv._

Slender, finely hairy or glabrescent twiner. Leaves cordate-ovate, 1½-3
in. long; petiole as long. Peduncle 1-3 in. long; fl. several in a head,
enclosed in a large, 2-cusped, foliaceous, boat-shaped bract, 2 in.
diam.; cor. bright pink, 1-2 in. long, funnel-shaped; limb 1½-2 in.
diam. Caps. small, globose, glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=I. amœna= _Choisy._

Twiner with soft yellow hairs, mixed in younger parts with white hairs.
Leaves ovate, shallowly cordate, 1-3½ in. long. Fl. in dense hairy
cymose heads; cor. purple-violet or cream, with crimson throat, ab. ½
in. long. Capsules small, glabrous, 2-celled.

Nubia; Fung & Kordofan Provinces.


=I. chætocaulos= _Hallier f._

Twining herb with golden bristly hairs. Leaves suborbicular, cordate, 3½
in. long; petiole 4 in. long. Fl. in dense heads; bracts ovate, ¾ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=I. Pes-tigridis= _Linn._

Twining annual with long fulvous hairs. Leaves palmately 7-9 lobed,
1½-2½ in. long, 2-3 in. broad; lobes narrowly oval; petiole 1½-2½ in.
long. Peduncles longer than petioles, bearing dense hirsute, few-
flowered heads; bracts foliaceous, oblong; cor. funnel-shaped, purple,
ab. 1½ in. long. Caps. brown, glabrous; seeds black, shortly pubescent.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Haraz).


=I. hederacea= _Jacq._

Slender, hairy twiner. Leaves shallowly cordate-ovate, rather shallowly
3-lobed, 2-5 in. long. Peduncle 1-5 flowered; sepals with a long, narrow
point, ¾-1 in. long; cor. funnel-shaped, 2-3 in. long, usually ashy-blue
with a white tube. Caps. small, 3-celled; seeds 6, smooth.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Berber Prov. (Metemma); Blue Nile
Prov.; Fung, Kordofan, Upper White Nile & Darfur Provinces.

The seeds, powdered with ginger, are used as a purgative.


=I. pilosa= _Sweet._ UM SHE’ERA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Twining herb with yellowish-white hairs. Leaves cordate-ovate, 2-4 in.
long, palmately 3-lobed with white tomentum beneath. Fl. laxly cymose on
1-2 in. long, hairy peduncles, 5-merous; sepals linear-acuminate,
glandular; cor. purple-carmine, funnel-shaped, 1 in. long. Capsule
globose; ripe seeds hanging by filaments out of capsule.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Berber Prov. (Metemma); Fung Prov.;
White Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El
Zeraf).

The roots are pounded and an infusion drunk to calm abdominal pains.


=I. obscura= _Ker._

Pubescent twiner. Leaves ovate, cordate, 1½-2 in. long. Peduncle ½-1 in.
long, 1-3 flowered; cor. white with a purple base, funnel-shaped, 1 in.
long, 1-1½ in. diam. Caps. globose, glabrous, ⅜ in. diam.

Between Kassala & Suakin (J. Erkeneb); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-
land).


=I. near I. obscura= _Ker._

Leaves gland-dotted, cordate to subhastate or deltoid.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kio); Mongalla Prov. (above Bor).


=I. fragilis= _Choisy._

Slender twiner. Leaves narrowly cordate-ovate, acuminate, 1-2 in. long.
Fl. 1-2 axillary, on long peduncles exceeding the leaves; cor. white or
buff, funnel-shaped, ¾ in. long. Caps. glabrous.

Kordofan Prov. (Obeid); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Western
Bongo-land & Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


=I. acanthocarpa= _Hochst._

Glabrous twiner. Leaves cordate-ovate, 1-3 in. long; petiole 1-3 in.
long. Peduncle 1-3 flowered; cor. white or pale-purple, funnel-shaped, 1
in. long. Caps. globose, tipped with persistent style base.

Kordofan Prov. (Obeid); Nuba Mts. Prov. (near Talodi).


=I. cf. I. acanthocarpa= _Hochst._

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=I. hellebarda= _Schwfth._

Tuberous-rooted twiner. Leaves very variable, ovate to sagittate or
hastate, 2-3 in. long. Peduncle 1½-3 in. long, bearing a few-flowered
cyme; cor. bright red-purple, 2 in. long, funnel-shaped, ab. 2 in. diam.
Caps. globose; seeds 4, brown-velvety.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: around Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


=I. aquatica= _Forsk._ FARU (Meshra El Zeraf), ARKALA (Kordn.)—Arab;
AFAT (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Hollow-stemmed trailing and twining herb, also floating on the water.
Leaves cordate-ovate or hastate, 3-6 in. long, on long petioles.
Peduncles 1-2 in. long, 1- few-flowered; cor. bright-purple, 2-3 in.
long, funnel-shaped; limb spreading, 2½ in. diam.; capsule globose, ⅓
in. diam.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Between Berber & Khartoum; Fung
Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Wad Shellai and edges of the Nile); Kordofan
Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. Most parts of
the Sudan, growing in or near water.

The young shoots are eaten. It is the important factor in binding
together Sudd plants.


=I. near I. leucantha= _Webb._

Twiner with linear, hastate leaves. Cor. white with purple-lilac centre.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=I. repens= _Lam._ ABU HALAGIN—Arab; TARASHO—Bari.

Trailing perennial with hollow stem, growing on muddy banks. Leaves
cordate, orbicular or reniform, 3-6 in. diam.; petiole 1-4 in. long.
Peduncles 1-4 in. long, bearing a few to many flowered cyme; cor. red or
purple, funnel-shaped, 2-3 in. long. Capsule globose; seeds size of a
pea.

Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov. (banks of the Nile); Kordofan Prov.
(south, swamps); Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Mongalla
Prov.


=I. Batatas= _Lam._ BOMBAY—Arab; BAMBE (red var.) or AMBIRIA & BAZAMBE
(white var.)—Zande. Sweet Potato.

White, red or rarely yellow tuberous-rooted perennial. Leaves very
variable, more or less trilobed, 3-4 in. long; petiole long. Cymes dense
on long peduncles; cor. reddish, 1½ in. long, funnel-shaped.

Kordofan & Mongalla Provinces and other parts of the Sudan.

Cultivated for its tuber.


=I. near I. Batatas= _Lam._

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=I. dissecta= _Willd._

Slender trailing herb. Leaves digitate with 5 deeply pinnatifid to
pinnatisect segments, 1-1½ in. diam. Fl. 1-3 on peduncles shorter than
the leaves; cor. white, funnel-shaped, ½ in. long. Caps. globose,
3-celled.

Kordofan & Mongalla Provinces.


=I. pulchella= _Roth._

Slender twiner. Leaves deeply divided into 5 elliptic segments, the 2
lower bilobed, segments ¾-1 in. long. Fl. solitary, axillary; cor. rose-
purple, ½ in. long; tube inflated, limbs spreading. Caps. ⅓ in. diam.;
seeds hairy.

Khartoum Prov. (Soba); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.;
Upper White Nile Prov. (Kaka).


=I. palmata= _Forsk._

Twining herb. Leaves with 5 lanceolate segments, the 2 lower bilobed,
1-3 in. long; petiole same length, based by 2 stipular, 7-8 partite
leaves. Cymes axillary, lax, few to many flowered; cor. red-purple, 1½-2
in. long, funnel-shaped. Caps. globose, under ½ in. diam.; seeds 4,
white, hairy.

Khartoum, Blue Nile, Fung, White Nile, Kordofan & Mongalla Provinces.


=I. dasysperma= _Jacq._ ABU ’ELEIBA (Hillet Abbas)—Arab.

Herbaceous twiner. Leaves as above or doubly tripartite, 2-3 in. long.
Fl. 1-3 on short peduncles; sepals slightly spurred at base; cor. buff
with purple throat; limb spreading, 1½-2 in. diam. Caps. globose; seeds
4, orange, pilose.

Blue Nile, Fung, White Nile (Hillet Abbas) & Kordofan Provinces.


=I. magnifica= _Hallier f._

Shrub, 4-6 ft. high. Leaves ovate-suborbicular, ab. 5 in. long,
undulate, grey-pubescent beneath. Fl. solitary, axillary; cor. white-
rose, 5 in. long and broad, funnel-shaped.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=I. verbascoidea= _Choisy._

Shrub, 3-5 ft. high, with yellow or white, woolly tomentum. Leaves
cordate-oblong, 3-6 in. long, with 2 glands near junction of petiole.
Peduncle 1-3 flowered, up to 1 in. long; cor. rose-purple, 3-4 in. long,
funnel-shaped. Caps. globose; seeds ¼ in. long, covered with fulvous
wool.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land & Jur Ghattas).


=I. lilacina= _Blume._

Strong twiner. Leaves cordate-ovate, sometimes 3-lobed, 3-4 in. long,
more or less pubescent. Peduncle 2-5 in. long, many-flowered; cor.
lilac-pink, 1½-2 in. long, funnel-shaped. Caps. globose; seeds hairy.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kodok); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main River); Bahr
El Jebel (Sudd).


=I. eurysepala= _Hallier f._

Dwarf hairy herb. Leaves elongate-ovate, up to 2 in. long. Fl. axillary,
1-2 together; sepals nearly ½ in. long, broadly ovate; cor. ½ in. long.
Caps. glabrous; seeds 4, pale-yellow.

Kordofan Prov.


=I. convolvulifolia= _Hallier f._

Procumbent herb with fulvous hairs. Leaves cordate, subsagittate, 1 in.
long, pubescent. Peduncles short, 1-2 flowered; cor. rose-red, 1 or more
in. long. Caps. glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumango hill).


=I. digitata= _Linn._

Twiner, with fleshy, tuberous root. Leaves palmately 3-9 lobed, 4-8 in.
long, shallowly cordate. Cymes compound, several to many-flowered; cor.
bright red-purple, centre darker, campanulate funnel-shaped, 2-3 in.
long. Caps. globose; seeds with tawny-white hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Nabambisso River, & Bongo-
land: Kulongo).

The tuberous roots are used medicinally in India.


=I. near I. incomta= _Hallier f._ TUDU (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Stout twiner. Leaves cordate ovate, silvery pubescent or tomentose. Cor.
white, funnel-shaped, 2½ in. long; sepals hairy. Seeds silky-hairy.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Eliri); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


619 =Merremia kentrocaulos= _Rendle._

Twining perennial. Leaves palmately 5-7 partite, 3-6 in. long. Fl. laxly
cymose; cor. yellow, red at base, funnel-shaped, 2-2½ in. long. Caps.
ellipsoid, ½-¾ in. long, 2-celled; seeds 4, black.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu & Bongo
lands); Bahr El Jebel (Nyangara).


=M. pterygocaulos= _Hallier f._

Reddish herbaceous twiner; stem, petioles and peduncles winged. Leaves
palmately 3-lobed, 2-4 in. long, deeply cordate. Cymes few to many-
flowered; cor. white, or pale yellow with purple throat. Caps. globose,
under ½ in. diam., seeds grey to blackish, size of a pea.

Fung Prov. (Wadi El Gamalu); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (mouth of Bahr El
Arab); Mongalla Prov. (North of Gondokoro).


=M. pedata= _Hallier f._

Twiner. Leaves pedately 5-lobed, segments filiform. Peduncle 1-flowered;
cor. probably white, streaked with purple.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & Khor Tamanib).


=M. palmata= _Hallier f._

Climbing or trailing herb. Leaves palmately deeply 5-lobed, lowest pair
sometimes unequally forked, 1½-2½ in. long. Peduncle 1-flowered, up to 3
in. long, thickened above; cor. probably pale-yellow, 1 in. long,
funnel-shaped.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Gweb near Tamanib).


=M. pentaphylla= _Hallier f._ ’ERG EL M’OTERASH, TĀTAMBA, SHEHER &
TORFRID (Kordn.) & UM GEREISĀT (N. Kordn.), SHAG EL FIL—Arab.

Slender twiner, hirsute with yellowish hairs. Leaves deeply 5-lobed, 2-4
in. long; petiole 2-4 in. long. Peduncle as long as leaf, few or many-
flowered; cor. white or yellowish, 1 in. long, campanulate funnel-
shaped. Caps. ½ in. diam.; enclosed in persistent hairy sepals; seeds
brown, glabrous.

Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile
Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.


=M. gallabatensis= _Hallier f._

Herb with only one long-stalked leaf, which is ovate-oblong, subcordate,
4 in. long, irregularly lobed. Peduncle longer than leaf; cymes dense,
many-flowered; cor. about ⅔ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=M. xanthophylla= _Hallier f._

Trailing or climbing herb, clothed with yellow-brown hairs. Leaves
pinnately 5-9 lobed, 2½ in. by 2 in., shallowly cordate. Peduncle 1-2
in. long; cymes few-flowered; cor. whitish, ½ in. long, funnel-shaped.

Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=M. angustifolia= _Hallier f._

Twiner. Leaves linear, auricled and hastate at base, 1-3 in. long.
Peduncle 1-3 flowered, 1 in. long; cor. pale yellow, ab. ½ in. long.
Caps. globose, ¼ in. diam.

Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon, etc.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Bahr
El Jebel (Shambé, Bahr El Ghazal Prov. to Mongalla, etc.).


=M. pinnata= _Hallier f._

Trailing or twining annual, hairy all over. Leaves pinnately divided to
the midrib, 1 in. long. Peduncles 1-3 flowered; bracts linear; cor.
yellow or white, small. Caps. hairy, ¼ in. diam.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land); Bahr El
Jebel (Madi).


=M. emarginata= _Hallier f._

Trailing herb with a long, woody root. Leaves orbicular or reniform, ½-1
in. broad. Fl. 1-2 axillary, sessile; cor. yellow with dark eye, small.
Caps. globose, ¼ in. diam., glabrous.

Kassala Prov. (Gedaref); Fung Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Fashoda to
Barboi); Mongalla Prov. (Nuer-land).


=M. convolvulacea= _Dennst._ OWARIDA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Slender twiner. Leaves subcordate or 3-lobed, ½-1½ in. long. Fl. 1 to
many, cymose; peduncle ¼-2 in. long; cor. yellow subcampanulate, ⅓ in.
long; limb ½ in. diam. with 5 violet lines. Caps. ovoid-globose, ¼ in.
diam.

Fung, Kordofan, Upper White Nile, Bahr El Ghazal (Wau) & Mongalla
Provinces.

The Arabs at Meshra El Zeraf believe that if the barrel of a gun be held
over the smoke of a fire made with the roots of this plant, it will in
future shoot straight.


620 =Calonyction speciosum= _Choisy._ Moon-flower.

Stout climber; stems smooth or with fleshy tubercles. Leaves cordate-
ovate, long acuminate, 4-6 in. long; petiole about as long. Peduncle as
long as petiole, 1-6 flowered; 3 outer sepals abruptly aristate, ab. ¾
in. long; cor. white, salver-shaped, opening at night; tube cylindric,
3-4 in. long; limb 4-6 in. diam. Caps. large, ovoid, 1 in. long; seeds
dark brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=C. muricatum= _G. Don._

Wide-climbing twiner, stems with fleshy spine-like tubercles. Leaves
cordate-ovate, acuminate, 4-5 in. long. Peduncle short or long, 1-6
flowered; pedicel much swollen in young fruit; cor. pale rose or lilac,
opening at night; tube 2-2½ in. long, passing into a funnel-shaped limb,
2 in. diam.; cap. globose up to 1 in. diam; seeds 4, white (?or brown).

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


621 =Astrochlæna lachnosperma= _Hallier f._ UM GHALEILA (Kordn.)—Arab.

Erect perennial with stellate hairs (as others in this genus), hairs
white. Leaves ovate or elliptic, 1½-3 in. long; petiole 1-2 in. long.
Fl. solitary or umbellate; cor. purple and lilac, ¾ in. long, funnel-
shaped. Caps. globose, ⅓ in. diam.; seeds 4, hairy.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Zalingei); Red Sea Prov. (near Akik).


=A. Volkensii= _Dammer._

Herb, 1½-2½ ft. high. Leaves ovate, cordate or rounded at base, 1½-3½
in. long; petiole ½ in. long. Fl. axillary, cymose; cor. lilac with
carmine centre; ab. 1½ in. long. Caps. globose; seeds 4, hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Tonj to Deim Zubeir); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla, on
ironstone).


=A. Engleriana= _Dammer._

Herb, stellate hairs ferruginous. Leaves ovate, undulate, with dense
white tomentum beneath. Cymes axillary, long-peduncled. Cor. probably
lilac, 1¼ in. long, funnel-shaped.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas); Moru-land.


=A. malvacea= _Hallier f._

Erect or decumbent perennial. Leaves ovate, 2-5 in. long, white
tomentose beneath. Peduncle 1 in. long, 2-5 flowered; cor. purple, 1½-2
in. long, funnel-shaped. Caps. globose; seeds 4, black.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=A. Stuhlmannii= _Hallier f._

Erect or trailing herb, with matted tawny hairs. Leaves ovate, 4-5 in.
long, cuneate to cordate. Fl. in corymbose panicle; cor. lilac with
purple tube, 1½ in. long. Caps. globose; seeds black, hairy.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme, & J. Marra, 5,200 ft.).


622 =Lepistemon africanum= _Oliv._

Herbaceous climber with bristly pale-brown stinging hairs. Leaves
cordate-ovate, 2-6 in. long, irregularly sinuate. Cymes many-flowered;
cor. white; tube ½ in. long; limb ½ in. diam. Caps. ovoid, hairy, ½ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


623 =Jacquemontia capitata= _G. Don._

Short twiner. Leaves ovate, ¼ in. long. Fl. in dense rusty villous
heads; cor. bright blue, ab. ½ in. long.

Kordofan Prov. (common); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Bahr El
Jebel (Shambé & Madi).


624 =Convolvulus Hystrix= _Vahl._

Erect undershrub; branches short, hairy, ending in spines. Leaves
oblong, ½ in. long. Fl. solitary, axillary, sessile; cor. ab. ½ in.
long, little longer than calyx.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.L., & Soturba); Berber Prov.


=C. microphyllus= _Sieber._ MURMIT (N. Kordn.) & GHUBEYRA—Arab.

Bushy herb. Cauline leaves oblong to lanceolate, ½ in. long; radical
leaves narrowly spathulate, 1 in. long. Fl. 1-3 together from upper
nodes of stem; sepals hairy, ¼ in. long; cor. pinkish-white, ab. ½ in.
long, funnel-shaped, hairy outside. Caps. globose.

North Sudan; Red Sea Prov. (Khor Ashat; Dongola Prov. (near Wadi Allangi
& Wadi El Arab); Berber Prov. (Wadi Selem); Kordofan Prov. (North,
Safia).


=C. Deserti= _Hochst._ & _Steud._

Small, shrubby herb. Leaves lin.-oblong, up to 1¾ in. long, hairy. Fl.
1-2 together, axillary along the stem. Cor. ab. ½ in. long, funnel-
shaped.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & 21° N.L.).


=C. rhyniospermus= _Hochst._

Small trailing or tufted herb, brown, hairy. Leaves oblong or
oblanceolate, 1-2 in. long. Fl. axillary along the stem, solitary or
clustered, enclosed in foliaceous bracts; cor. ½ in. long, hairy. Caps.
globose, beaked, ¼ in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin); Kordofan Prov. (J. Kon).


=C. glomeratus= _Choisy._

Stiff, bushy herb or climber. Leaves lanceolate, ¼-1 in. long. Fl. in
dense globose rusty-hairy heads; bracts foliaceous, ¾ in. long; sepals
5, 2 outer larger, fulvous; cor. pale-rose, ½ in. long. Caps. globose,
glabrous.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L. to Khor Tamanib).


=C. arvensis= _Linn._ MUDDEYD—Arab.

Slender twiner. Leaves ovate-hastate, 1-2 in. long. Fl. 1-3 on long
peduncles; cor. deep-rose, funnel-shaped, ¾ in. long. Caps. globose, ¼
in. diam.

White Nile.

The plant is said to be eaten by goats and cattle.


=C. fatmensis= _Kunze._ ULLEYA—Arab.

Diffuse herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves cordate-ovate, deeply crenate,
auricled, ½-1½ in. long. Fl. 1-2 on axillary peduncles; cor. white with
brown stripes, under ½ in. long, hairy outside. Caps. globose, ¼ in.
diam.

Kordofan Prov.


625 =Evolvulus alsinoides= _Linn._

Bushy herb. Leaves elliptic to lanceolate, ½-1 in. long, hairy.
Peduncles 1-3 flowered; cor. bright blue, rarely white, funnel-shaped, ¼
in. diam.; styles 2, forked. Caps. globose, minute.

North Sudan; Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L. & Has Has); Blue Nile Prov. (J.
Moya); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli); Darfur Prov. (Kulme & 40-80 m. N.E. of
Fasher); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Kutshuk Ali); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).

Used as febrifuge and tonic.


=E. nummularius= _Linn._

Small trailing herb; stems shortly hairy, rooting at the nodes. Leaves
orbicular, ab. ½ in. diam. Fl. few, solitary in axils of leaves; sepals
ovate, ciliate; cor. white, deeply lobed, ¼ in. long. Caps globose, ⅙
in. diam; seeds 2-4, black or brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Lehsi River); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla).


=E. agrestis= _Schwfth._

Tufted or climbing annual with reddish hairs. Leaves lanceolate, ¾-1½
in. long. Peduncles axillary, 1-2 flowered, bearing characteristic
hairs; bracts linear; sepals ciliate-hairy; cor. ¼ in. long. Caps. ¼ in.
diam.; seeds black.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


626 =Seddera virgata= _Hochst._ & _Steud._

Much branched, virgate undershrub with white appressed hairs. Leaves
sessile, distant, linear, ½-1 in. long. Fl. in sparse racemes at end of
branchlets; sep. obovate; cor. broadly funnel-shaped, ¼ in. long, with
hairy mid-petaline area; styles 2, almost from base. Caps. globose, ⅙
in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Wadi Omari, J. Waratab, Suakin); Khartoum Prov. (rocky
hills); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=S. arabica= _Choisy._

Much-branched virgate undershrub with yellowish pubescence. Leaves
subsessile, elliptical, ab. ½ in. long. Fl. usually solitary, axillary;
sep. small, elliptic to obovate; cor. ⅓ in. long, limb ¼ in. diam.;
styles 2, free from the base.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Khor Tamanib).


627 =Dichondra repens= _Forst._

Pubescent, trailing perennial, rooting from the nodes. Leaves reniform,
¼-1 in. broad, more or less silky; petioles long. Fl. axillary,
solitary; calyx minute, pilose; cor. yellow, deeply 5-fid., minute;
stigmas capitate. Caps. 2-lobed, 1-seeded.

Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro).


628 =Cressa cretica= _Linn._ EL HĀD (N. Kordn.), NADAWE, ABU HOSABA,
MULLEY, SEBAKH & NU’EM—Arab.

Low, shrubby perennial. Leaves ovate to lanceolate, ⅙ to ¼ in. long. Fl.
in dense bracteate spikes at end of branchlets; calyx hairy, minute;
cor. ab. ¼ in. long; styles 2, free. Caps. ovoid, minute, 1-seeded.

Red Sea Prov. (near Suakin); Kordofan (Shersha, on salt pans).

The plant is used as a tonic.


629 =Cuscuta planiflora= _Ten._ Dodder.

Leafless parasitic twiner with pink stems; germinates in the ground, but
later sustains itself entirely on the juices of its host. Fl. in dense
globose sessile clusters; fl. pentamerous pale-pink or whitish, globose-
urceolate, very minute.

Red Sea Prov. (coast to between 3,000 & 4,000 ft., Suakin 21° N.L.);
Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, high altitudes).


=C. arabica= _Fres._

Differs by smaller flower-clusters.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Blue Nile Prov. (Kamlin).


=C. obtusiflora var. cordofana= _Engelm._

Stems stouter, bright yellow.

Kordofan Prov.


=C. hyalina= _Roth._

Stems slender, almost translucent. Fl. minute, stalked, cymose.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin); Kordofan Prov.


                           =SCROPHULARIACEÆ.=


630 =Aptosimum pumilum= _Benth._

Dwarf tufted herb. Leaves usually alt., linear, 1-3 in. long, scabrid-
pubescent. Fl. solitary or several axillary; cor. white outside and blue
inside, 5-lobed; st. didynamous. Caps. globose, emarginate, compressed
at apex.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Kon); Darfur Prov. (48-80 m. N.E. of El Fasher).


631 =Anticharis arabica= _Endl._

Glandular-pubescent annual, 1 ft. high. Leaves alt., oblong-lanceolate
to lin.-lanceolate, up to 1¼ in. long. Fl. axillary, solitary; cor.
pink, viscid, ¼ in. long, lobes 5, subequal; st. 2, 1-celled. Caps.
narrowly ovoid, beaked, ¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin J. Waratab, Soturba); between Suakin & Berber
(Wadi Omareg).


=A. linearis= _Hochst._ NIDEIĀNA (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Erect glandular-pubescent annual, up to 1 ft. high. Leaves sessile,
linear, up to 2 in. long. Fl. solitary on ½ in. long axillary peduncle
with 2 bracts above middle; calyx deeply 5-cleft; cor. white, under ½
in. long; lobes 5, subequal; st. 2, anther-lobes basally acuminate;
stigma bifid. Caps. ⅓ in. long, beaked or acuminate.

North Sudan (coast region, between Suakin & Berber); Banks of the Nile
north of Khartoum; Between Goz Regeb & Kassala; Khartoum Prov. (J.
Royan); Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid, Bara); Darfur Prov.


632 =Verbascum Ternacha= _Hochst._ Mullein.

Tall herb with dense white or yellowish woolly tomentum. Lower leaves
oval or oblong, crenate or serrate; petiole 1-2 in. long; upper leaves
smaller subamplexicaul. Panicles 18 in. long, branches 6-12 in. long,
spreading; fl. clustered along the branches, 5-merous, rotate; cor.
yellow, ¾ in. diam.; filaments bearded. Caps. ovoid, ¼ in. long.

Dongola, Red Sea & Darfur Provinces.


633 =Linaria hastata= _R. Br._

Herb, up to 1 ft. high. Leaves opp. below, alt. above, linear to
lanceolate, hastate, ½-1 in. long. Peduncles axillary, ab. 1 in. long;
calyx 5-partite, small; cor. yellow, ¼ in. long, 2-lipped, with small
spur; st. 4, didynamous, woolly; stigma emarginate; caps. ovoid, minute.

Red Sea Prov. (Hakeko, Port Sudan District).


=L. Bentii= _Skan._

Densely glandular pubescent undershrub, ab. 1 ft. high. Leaves subopp.
below, alt. above, ovate to triangular, cordate, ⅓ in. long. Fl.
axillary, solitary, subsessile; cor. 2-lobed, spurred, ab. ½ in. long.
Caps. globose-ovoid, minute.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=L. nubica= _Skan._

Glandular-pubescent, subscandent annual. Leaves opp. below, alt. above,
triangular to ovate, broadly cordate, ab. 1 in. long. Fl. axillary,
solitary; cor. 2-lobed and spurred, under ½ in. long, hairy. Caps.
ovoid, pubescent, small.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L., sea-coast to between 3,000 & 4,000 ft.).


=L. ægyptiaca= _Dum._

Low, bushy shrublet, covered with gland-tipped hairs. Leaves ovate or
ovate-lanceolate, acute, ¼ in. long. Flowers axillary, solitary,
yellowish; pedicels ½ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Gendua River); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 9,500
ft.).


=L. sagittata= _Hook. f._

Subscandent or procumbent perennial. Leaves linear to lanceolate,
sagittate or hastate or cuneate, ¼-2 in. long. Fl. axillary; peduncles
¼-½ in. long; cor. yellow, pilose outside, bilobed, ¾ in. long, spur ½
in. long; filaments densely pilose. Caps. globose, minute.

Red Sea Prov. (J. Waratab, Wadi Omareg, between Suakin & Erkowit,
Dongonab).


634 =Schweinfurthia pterosperma= _A. Braun._

Herb, 6-9 in. high. Leaves alt., elliptic-spathulate to lin.-oblong, up
to 1 in. long. Fl. solitary; calyx small, 5-partite; cor. ¼ in. long,
gibbous at base, 2-lipped, white, pink at throat. Caps. subglobose, ¼
in. diam.; seeds with 6 subwinged ridges.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & coast region, J. Waratab); Between Suakin &
Berber.


635 =Scrophularia arguta= _Ait._

Branched, glandular-pubescent herb, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves broadly
ovate, subcordate, irregularly dentate, up to 3 in. long; petiole ½-1
in. long. Fl. in terminal cymose panicles; calyx 5-fid, minute; cor.
ventricose, 5-lobed, 1 lobe larger, hardly exceeding calyx, deep-red.
Caps. ovoid, beaked.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Khor Tamanib, & 21° N.L.).


636 =Antirrhinum Orontium= _Linn._

Glandular hairy herb, up to 2 ft. high. Lower leaves opp., upper alt.,
linear to lanceolate, 1-2 in. long. Fl. solitary in upper axils of
leaves; calyx 5-partite; cor. 2-lipped, rose with purple veins, ¼-¾ in.
long, tube gibbous. Caps. obliquely ovoid, up to ½ in. long, hispidly
hairy.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L. and other places); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra:
Niurnya, 6,500 ft.).


637 =Sutera glandulosa= _Roth._

Small diffuse viscid-pubescent herb. Leaves ovate or oblong, incised-
dentate, pinnatifid or dissected, ¼-1 in. long, lower opp., upper alt.
Fl. in upper axils of leaves; calyx 5-partite, minute; cor. ⅙ in. long,
white, tube not dilated, lobes small, 2 smaller; st. 4, included; style
shortly 2-lobed. Caps. ovoid, minute.

Near Wadi Halfa (between Korosko & Derr); Dongola Prov. (Debba); Near
Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (El Ehs).


638 =Lindenbergia abyssinica= _Hochst._

Glandular-pubescent or pilose perennial. Leaves opp. or upper alt.,
broadly-ovate, cuneate to subcordate, ½ in. long, coarsely crenate-
dentate. Fl. in leafy terminal, secund racemes; cor. ⅔ in. long,
2-lipped, postichous lip 2-lobed, antichous 3-lobed. Caps. ovoid, ⅓ in.,
pubescent.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Erkowit, Khor Tamanib, Wadi Omareg).


639 =Stemodia serrata= _Benth._

Small branched viscid glandular-pubescent herb. Leaves opp. or
verticillate, rather crowded, oblong or lanceolate, up to 2 in. long,
serrate above middle. Fl. crowded in leafy spike-like racemes; bracts 2,
near calyx, which is 5-partite, ¼ in. long; cor. bluish, slightly longer
than calyx, 2-lipped, upper emarginate, lower shortly 3-lobed. Caps. ¼
in. long, 4-furrowed.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Nuba Mts. Prov.
(J. Kurun); Upper White Nile Prov. (Kaka woodstation).


640 =Limnophila gratioloides= _R. Br._

Marsh herb, usually 5 in. high. Leaves verticillate and opposite,
submerged leaves in filiform segments, upper gland-dotted, linear to
elliptic-oblong. Fl. axillary on ½ in. long glandular-pubescent
pedicels; calyx 5-partite, glandular, small; cor. white, ab. ⅓ in. long;
st. 4, each pair or only lower pair of anthers cohering. Caps. minute.

White Nile & Upper White Nile Provinces (Debeiker to Hillet Abbas); Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & mouth of Bahr El Arab).


641 =Moniera calycina= _Hiern._

Gland-dotted glabrous herb, 6-12 in. high. Leaves opp., lanceol. to
ovate, 1¼ in. long, crenate-serrate, solitary; calyx 5-partite, ¼ in.
long, larger in fruit; cor. white, ⅓ in. long, 2-lipped, upper
emarginate, lower deeply 3-lobed. Caps. ⅙ in. long, ellipsoid, gland-
dotted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Dukutu).


=M. floribunda= _T. Cooke._

Small gland-dotted scabrid herb. Leaves linear to narrowly oblong, ½-2½
in. long. Fl. axillary, solitary or in pairs; calyx 5-partite, ab. ¼ in.
long; cor. blue or violet with yellow throat, ⅙ in. long, upper lip
emarginate, lower 3-lobed. Caps. ellipsoid, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Gir in Bongo-land); Mongalla Prov.
(Gameiza woodstation).


=M. punctata= _Skan._

Small glandular-punctate herb; stem quadrangular. Leaves linear or
lin.-lanceolate, sessile, ab. 1 in. long. Fl. axillary, solitary,
subsessile; calyx under ¼ in. long; cor. ⅙ in. long, shape as above.
Caps. globose, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Aggada & Jur Ghattas).


642 =Dopatrium luteum= _Engl._

Aquatic herb, up to 1 ft. high. Lower leaves strap-shaped, ½-1 in. long,
upper scale-like. Fl. in terminal raceme; calyx small, 5-fid; cor.
showy, yellow, ab. 1¼ in. long, upper lip emarginate, lower 3-partite;
st. 2 perfect and 2 rudimentary. Caps. subglobose, under ¼ in.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


=D. tricolor= _Engl._

Herb, 1½ ft. high. Radical leaves crowded, linear, 1½-2¼ in. long, upper
scale-like. Fl. in terminal raceme; calyx small, 5-fid; cor. tube ½ in.
long, whitish, upper lip violet, ¼ in. long, emarginate, lower lip
violet with yellow central lobe, under ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


643 =Mimulus gracilis= _R. Br._

Erect herb, up to 20 in. high; stem narrowly 4-winged. Leaves
opp.-lanceolate to narrowly-oblong, ¾-2 in. long, amplexicaul, sometimes
denticulate. Fl. solitary, axillary on ped., 2 in. long; calyx 5-angled,
dentate, ab. ⅓ in. long; cor. white or light pink, over ½ in. long,
unequally bilabiate. St. 4, didynamous. Caps. obovoid, ¼ in. long.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Kurra, 5,200 ft.).


644 =Craterostigma Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Perennial 6 to 18 in. high; stems quadrangular. Leaves opp., 3-nerved,
elliptic-lanceolate, up to ¾ in. long. Fl. terminal, subcapitate; calyx
nearly ¼ in. long, 5-angled, 5-toothed; cor. violet, over ½ in. long,
2-lipped, upper suborbicular, lower 3-lobed; st. 4; filaments arching
and with gibbous base; anthers cohering in pairs; stigma somewhat
funnel-shaped.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Lessi River).


645 =Torenia spicata= _Engl._

Dwarf herb with narrowly 4-winged stems. Leaves opp., sessile, unequal
above, lanceolate, up to 9 in. long. Lower fl. axillary, upper in spike-
like racemes; calyx ⅙ in. deeply 2-lipped, 5-winged; cor. pink, blue or
white, ⅙ in. long, upper lip 2-fid, lower 3-lobed; st. 4; filaments
toothed at base, arched. Caps. ovoid, under ¼ in.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: between Jur Ewet: Abu Gurun’s Zariba).


=T. parviflora= _Buch.-Ham._

Straggling herb, up to 18 in. high. Leaves opp., ovate to
or.-lanceolate, ½-1 in. long, serrate-crenate. Fl. solitary or 2-6
fascicled; calyx ⅓ in., 2-lipped, 5-winged; cor. white to purple, over ⅓
in. long; st. as above. Caps. ⅓ in. long, oblong.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


646 =Lindernia lobelioides= _Engl._

Herb, ½-1 ft. high, much like a small _Lobelia_ in appearance. Leaves
opp., linear, 1 in. long, upper unequal. Fl. axillary, solitary; calyx
5-fid, ¼ in. long; cor. deep blue, nearly ½ in. long, upper lip ovate
truncate, lower 3-lobed; st. 4, filaments arched, toothed at base,
anthers cohering. Caps. linear-oblong, ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ewet, Bongo-land: Gir & Lessi River); Darfur
Prov. (J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=L. debilis= _Skan._

Prostrate small herb. Leaves opp., linear-lanceolate, up to ½ in. long,
sessile. Fl. solitary in upper axils; calyx 5-ribbed, minute; cor. ⅙ in.
long, upper lip purplish, emarginate, lower 3-lobed, yellow, streaked
purple. Capsule oblong, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


647 =Ilysanthes parviflora= _Benth._

Small herb. Leaves opp., ovate to oblong, up to ½ in. long, gland-
dotted. Fl. axillary or in terminal racemes; calyx 5-partite, minute;
cor. violet, blue or white; tube cylindrical ab. ¼ in. long, upper lip
bifid, lower spreading, 3-lobed; st. 2 perfect and 2 rudimentary. Caps.
ovoid.

Dongola Prov. (Island near Debba); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post, Roseires,
Famaka); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Bongo-land: Gir).


=I. trichotoma= _Urban._

Dwarf herb with short, stiff branches. Leaves opp., linear-oblong, ⅓ in.
long, sessile, otherwise much as above.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi rocks).


=I. Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Small herb, 4-8 in. high. Leaves linear, under ½ in. long. Fl. in a
loose raceme; cor. lilac, otherwise as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumango hill & Ibba River).


648 =Scoparia dulcis= _Linn._

Herb or undershrub. Leaves opp., ternate or verticillate, lin.- to
elliptic-lanceolate, ¼-1½ in. long, serrate above middle, punctate. Fl.
axillary, solitary or geminate; calyx minute, densely glandular,
4-lobed; cor. white, ⅛ in. long, rotate, 4-lobed, densely bearded at
throat; st. 4; caps. ovoid, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Jur River); Bahr El Jebel (Shambe,
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. to Mongalla, Mongalla Prov.); Darfur Prov. (Kulme);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).

Used in native medicine throughout Tropical Africa.


649 =Veronica Anagallis= _Linn._ HABAQ—Arab.

Glandular-pubescent herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., lanceolate,
sessile, 1-3½ in. long, semi-amplexicaul. Racemes 2-3 in. long in upper
axils; calyx 4-partite, minute; cor. blue or pinkish, 4-partite, limb
spreading, lobes of 3 sizes; st. 2, exserted. Caps. orbicular, minute.

Dongola Prov. (Nile banks between Old Dongola & Korti); Blue Nile Prov.
(Wad Medani, Sheikh Talha); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Niurnya, 6,500 ft.).


650 =Alectra communis= _Hemsl._

Very scabrid herb. Leaves ovate-triangular, coarsely dentate, about 1
in. long. Flowers subsessile in the leafy bracts. Calyx lobes pectinate-
ciliate.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Mid-Robo 8,300 ft.).


651 =Buchnera capitata= _Benth._

Annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp. or upper alt., linear to oblong-
lanceolate, ¾-3 in. long, sessile, scabrid. Fl. in terminal short dense
spikes, ¼-1⅓ in. long; fl. in axils of bracts and bracteoles; calyx
5-toothed, ⅙ in. long; cor. white, ¼ in. long; tube curved, slender,
pilose, lobes subequal, 5. Caps. ovoid, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Merdgan’s Zeriba).


=B. hispida= _Ham._

Hispid herb, 6-20 in. high. Leaves elliptic to oblong, up to 3 in. long
(upper oblong-lanceolate to linear) toothed, scabrid. Fl. in 6 in. long
spikes, bracteate and bracteolate; calyx 5-toothed, ¼ in. long, densely
hispid; cor. ab. ½ in. long, tube cylindric, lobes 5, obovate, short;
st. 4. Caps. elliptic-oblong, ¼ in. long.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6-7,000 ft.).


652 =Striga orobanchoides= _Benth._ NAR or NUR EL ASSAD—Arab; DAI
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Much branched herb, 3-18 in. high, parasitic on roots of some
Leguminosæ, etc. Leaves scale-like, lanceolate, up to ½ in. long. Spikes
terminal; fl. bracteate and bracteolate; calyx 5-toothed, ¼-½ in. long;
cor. white, purple or red-brown; tube ½ in. long, bent and inflated,
limb 2-lipped, upper 2-lobed, lower 3-lobed. St. 4, didynamous, anthers
1-celled. Caps. ovoid-oblong ¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib, Suakin); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma);
Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile & Upper White Nile Provinces (J.
Arashkol, Wad Shellai to Meshra El Zeraf); Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla
Prov. (Sheikh Tombé & Mongalla).

Parasitic on _Cissus quadrangularis_, _Indigofera_ sp., etc.


=S. aspera= _Benth._ =var. Schweinfurthii= _Skan._ TU—Krej.

Herbaceous hispid and scabrid root-parasite, growing on Dura. Leaves
opp. or upper alt., linear, ½-1½ in. long. Spikes terminal, lax-flowered
up to 8 in. long; bracts and bracteoles hispid; calyx nearly ½ in. long,
5-toothed, uppermost tooth smallest; cor. pink, tube ½ in. long curved
and inflated, upper lip obovate emarginate, 3-lobed. Caps. ellipsoid, ¼
in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land & Deim
Zubeir).

Parasitic on Dura.


=S. Forbesii= _Benth._

Erect herb, up to 15 in. high, scabrid. Leaves opp. or sub-opp.,
lin.-lanceolate or lanceolate, 1-2 in. long, toothed, scabrid. Fl.
solitary in axils of upper leaves; bracteoles linear, hispid; calyx
deeply 5-lobed, scabrid, lobes lin.-lanceolate, up to ⅓ in. long,
unequal; cor. pink, scarlet or yellow, tube ¾-1 in. long, sharply curved
and inflated, upper lip subtruncate or shortly 2-lobed, up to ¼ in.
long, lower 3-lobed up to nearly ½ in. long. Caps. oblong, ¼-⅓ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Mongalla
Prov. (Shambé to Mongalla Prov.).


=S. senegalensis= _Benth._

Closely resembles _S. hermonthica_ and may be a small-flowered form.
Cor. purple or red, tube ab. ½ in. long, upper lip up to ¼ in. long,
lower up to ⅓ in. long.

Kordofan Prov. (Gefil); Upper White Nile Prov. (Dinka country).


=S. hermonthica= _Benth._ EL WEIN (Merowe), SEGAR (Meshra El Zeraf) &
(more commonly) BUDA—Arab.

Branched herb, parasitic on Dura and Dukhn, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves linear
to lanceolate, 1-3 in. long, hispid and scabrid. Spikes terminal, 6 in.
long; calyx 5-toothed, upper smaller; cor. pink; tube ¾ in. long, curved
and inflated, upper lip 2-lobed, ⅓ in. long, lower 3-lobed, ½ in. long.
Caps. ellipsoid, ¼ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov.; Khartoum
Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar); Fung Prov. (Roseires & Jongol’s Post);
White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land, Jur Ghattas); Darfur
Prov. (Zalingei). Parasitic on _Sorghum_, _Andropogon_, _Zea_, etc.).

A decoction in salt and water is applied externally for sun headache.


=S. glandulifera= _Engl._

Branched herb, 6-8 in. high, pilose and scabrid. Leaves opp. and
subopp., narrowly linear, up to 1¼ in. long. Spikes terminal, 4 in.
long; fl. paired; calyx 5-toothed, ¼ in. long; cor. deep rose, tube ½
in. long, curved and inflated, glandular-pubescent, upper lip under ¼
in. long, slightly emarginate, lower lip 3-lobed, short. Caps. oblong,
1/7 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=S. strictissima= _Skan._

Densely hispid herb. Leaves lin.- or lanc.-subulate, under ½ in. long,
closely appressed in distant pairs. Spikes terminal, up to 4 in. long;
fl. paired in leaf-like bracts; calyx ¼ in. long, 5-toothed, upper
smaller; cor. dull-pink, tube ½ in. long, curved and inflated, hairy,
upper lip ⅛ in. long, truncate and toothed, lower 3-lobed, 1/12 in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


=S. lutea= _Lour._

Branched parasitic herb, 6-9 in. high, scabrid. Leaves alt. or opp.,
narrowly linear or lanceolate, ¼-1½ in. long. Spikes terminal, 4-6 in.
long, distant-flowered; bracts ¼ in. long, linear; calyx ¼ in. long,
10-ribbed and 5-toothed; cor. yellow, red or white, tube ab. ½ in. long,
suddenly bent above, upper lip obovate, lower 3-lobed, ¼ in. long. Caps.
oblong ovoid, ⅙ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Bongo-land); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


653 =Rhamphicarpa fistulosa= _Benth._

Erect branched herb, usually ab. 1 ft. high. Leaves pinn.- or bi-
pinnatisect, up to 3 in. long, segments linear; fl. axillary solitary;
calyx campanulate, 5-fid, ¼ in. long; cor. white, tube slender, 1-2 in.
long; limb spreading, ½-¾ in. diam., 5-lobed, 2 more connate. Caps.
ovoid, compressed, almost 2-winged, ⅓-½ in. long.

Nile River (Island near Debba in Dongola Prov.); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main river from Meshra El Rek to Lake
No); Niamniam-land (Nabambisso River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi Swamps).


=R. Heuglini= _Hochst._

Small branched herb. Leaves lin.-lanceolate to lanceolate, ½-2 in. long,
hispid or scabrid. Fl. axillary in upper leaves, solitary; calyx tubular
campanulate, ¼-½ in. long, 5-lobed; cor. white to mauve, tube ab. 1 in.
long, glandular, limb 1-2 in. diam, spreading, 5-lobed, 2 more connate.
Caps. obliquely ovoid ab. ⅓ in. long, beaked.

Khartoum Prov. (near Khartoum); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek);
Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


654 =Cycnium camporum= _Engl._

Tufted herb, up to 1 ft. high, pilose. Leaves lanc. to oblong-
lanceolate, 1-3 in. long, crenate-serrate. Fl. usually opp., supra-
axillary; calyx tubular, ½-⅔ in. long, campanulate in fruit, 10-ribbed,
hispid; cor. white or pale yellow, tube 1¾ in. long, glandular, gibbous,
limb 1¼ in. broad, spreading, 5-lobed. Caps. oblong ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: by the Wau River & Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-
land: Nabambisso River).


=C. adonense= _E. Meyer._

Robust scabrid herb, up to 1 ft. high. Leaves oblong or oblong-
lanceolate, 1-3 in. long, crenate to serrate. Fl. axillary; calyx
tubular, 1¼ in. long, densely hairy, 10-12 ribbed; cor. white or lilac,
tube 2-3 in. long, gibbous, glandular, limb 2-3 in. diam., spreading,
5-lobed. Caps. ovoid or elliptic, ½ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. brachycalyx= _Schweinf._

Shrubby herb, pubescent all over, 1 ft. high; stems angular. Leaves
lanceolate, 2½ in. long, serrate dentate. Fl. solitary, opp., supra-
axillary; calyx campanulate, 1 in. long, 3 lobes broader than others;
cor. tube 1¼ in. long, limb ab. ½ in. diam., lobes 5, orbicular,
spreading.

Kassala Prov. (by Gendua River).


655 =Sopubia ramosa= _Hochst._

Scabrid undershr., 2-4 ft. high. Leaves in whorls of 3-4, linear or
lin.-lanceolate, up to 1½ in. long. Fl. terminal racemose in whorls of
3-4; cor. coppery-purple or white with purple spot at base of each lobe,
ab. ½ in. long, tube short, limb spreading, lobes 5, obovate; anthers 4,
coherent in pairs. Caps. ovoid, ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: at Nganye & Bongo-land: at Sabbi);
Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, 6,500-7,500 ft.).


=S. simplex= _Hochst._

Pubescent herb, branching from base, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves alt. or
ternate, ⅙-1 in. long, appressed, scabrid. Fl. alt. or whorled in
terminal racemes, up to 1 ft. long; cor. pink, or reddish-brown, under ½
in. long, limb spreading, lobes 5, obovate. Caps. ovoid, ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Sueh River, Mittu-land: near
Kuffulu-Ku); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=S. parviflora= _Engl._

Annual, 1-2 ft. high; stem 4-angled. Leaves opp., filiform, ⅓-¾ in.
long, revolute, scabrid. Fl. in terminal racemes; cor. pale-brown,
purple at throat, ⅓ in. long, lobes 5, spreading, obovate. Caps.
subglobose, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


656 =Micrargeria scopiformis= _Engl._

Rigid herb, 1-2½ ft. high, branching like a broom. Leaves opp.,
filiform, ¼-2 in. long, scabrid. Fl. in terminal racemes, 1-6 in. long;
cor. pale purple, streaked dark purple at base of tube which is exserted
and enlarged above, ab. ⅓ in. long, limb spreading, 5-lobed, lobes
suborbicular ab. ⅙ in. wide.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Bongo-land: Sabbi).


                            =OROBANCHACEÆ.=


657 =Cistanche lutea= _Hoffmgg._ & _Link._ ERG EL TUNDUB (Khartoum),
NAR EL FIL (Atbara), ERG EL MOYA, also ERG EL SHAGAT (Fung), HALUK,
TURFAS & SIBB EL ARD—Arab.

Fleshy root-parasite with spirally arranged scale-like leaves and yellow
flowers; st. 4 didynamous; anthers bearded.

Red Sea Prov.; Berber Prov. (Atbara); Khartoum, Blue Nile & Fung
Provinces.

Parasitic on _Capparis decidua_, _Acacia arabica_, _Zizyphus_, etc.


658 =Orobanche cernua= _Loef._ =var. Desertorum= _Beck._

Stout parasitic herb, up to 16 in. high, covered with glandular and
cobweb-like pubescence and scaly leaves. Spikes cylindric, many-
flowered, 8 in. long; cor. bluish-white, ¾ in. long, 2-lipped, upper 2-
and lower 3-lobed.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=O. ramosa= _Linn._ HALUK—Arab.

Slender branched herb, 1 ft. high, glandular-hairy; scales ovate to
ovate-lanceolate, ¼-½ in. long. Fl. in spikes; cor. pale-yellow with a
blueish limb, ab. ½ in. long, upper lip 2-lobed, lower 3-lobed.

Khartoum Prov. (Khartoum).

Parasitic on Tomatoes.


                   =LENTIBULARIACEÆ (Bladder-worts).=


659 =Utricularia exilis= _Oliver._

Delicate dwarf herb; stems creeping filiform; leaves narrowly spathulate
or ligulate, ¼ in. long, deciduous before flowering, with small bladders
attached to stem and leaves, scape 1-2 in. high, 2-3 flowered; cor.
white, yellow or purple, 2-lipped, ab. ⅙ in. long; st. 2.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=U. Schweinfurthii= _Baker._

Delicate twining annual. Leaves unknown. Scapes filiform, twining, up to
6 in. long; fl. up to 6, distant; cor. pale-purple, 2-lipped, spurred;
st. 2.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


=U. subulata= _Linn._

Herb, 3-4 in. high, giving out bladder-bearing runners verticillately
from base of scape. Leaves lin.-lanceolate, rosulate at base of scape, ¼
in. long. Scape 1-6 flowered; cor. yellow, ¼ in. long, 2-tipped,
spurred; st. 2.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas) (Sub-terrestrial).


=U. Thonningii= _Schumach._

Floating aquatic herb, ab. 1 ft. long. Stem slender bearing verticils of
bladder-bearing pectinate-filiform leaves and scapes bearing near their
base a verticil of up to 6 spindle-shaped floats and above 3 to many
flowers. Sepals 2, enlarged in fruit; cor. pinkish, 2-lipped and
spurred; st. 2.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol, near Abba Island, & Lake Tura Um Kenen);
Bahr El Jebel (Sudd); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=U. stellaris= _Linn. f._

Much like above, but flowers yellow.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol & Um Kenen); Upper White Nile Prov.
(Tonga); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, & Jur-land: Wau).


=U. reflexa= _Oliver._

Floating aquatic herb. Leaves as above but bladders larger (up to ⅙ in.
long), up to 8 to a leaf. Scapes without floats, 1-6 in. long, 1-3
flowered; cor. yellow, ⅓ in. long, 2-lipped, spurred.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Main River).


=U. exoleta= _R. Br._

Small aquatic plant; stems filiform. Leaves with few slender segments or
replaced by small bladders. Scapes floatless, 2-3 in. long, 2-3
flowered; cor. yellow, ¼ in. long, 2-lipped and spurred. Caps. globose
exceeding calyx.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); White Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile
Prov. (Khor Attar); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek & Ghabat El
Arab, on Main River).


=U. incerta= _Kam._

Floating aquatic herb; stems long, filiform. Leaves bipinnate, pinnæ ¼
in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Main River).


                             =BIGNONIACEÆ.=


660 =Spathodea nilotica= _Seem._ The African “Tulip-tree.”

Tree, ab. 20 ft. high. Leaves opp. or ternate, 5-16 in. long; leaflets
9-15, ovate-oblong, 1½-4 in. long, pubescent below. Fl. in dense
terminal corymbose racemes; calyx boat-shaped, 2 in. long; cor. orange-
scarlet, 3-4½ in. long, 2-lipped. Caps. 8 in. long, lanceolate-oblong;
seeds winged, 1 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Manisilli Brook); Mongalla
Prov.

A very handsome tree. The wood is white and very soft; density 0.363.


661 =Stereospermum kunthianum= _Cham._ KHASHKHASH & KHASHKHASH ABIAD
(Fung), SAMR (Kordn.), & SUWEID (Medani)—Arab; TETERLING (J. Daier),
KARII (J. Eliri), & N’DULA (Kadugli)—Nuba; LUJURUT—Bari; WULIADO (Bahr
El Ghazal), & KONGGOGOI (Goz El Siada)—Dinka; CHOKO—Golo; FUNNA—Burun;
BARISANGO—Zande.

Tree up to 50 ft. high, with light-coloured flaking bark. Leaves opp.
imparipinnate 6-14 in. long; leaflets 5-9 ovate or elliptic-oblong, 1½-5
in. long. Fl. in terminal large cymose panicles; cor. pink with carmine
lines, 1½ in. long, tube funnel-shaped; st. 4. Caps. cylindric, 1-2 ft.
long; seeds 2-winged.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli, Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (Jebelein);
Kordofan Prov. (Rahad); Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River & Goz El
Siada); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land, near Old Wau, Chakchak, &
Niamniam-land); Darfur Prov. (Kordofan borders 13° N. Lat.; J. Marra;
Kallo Kitting, 4,000 ft.); Mongalla Prov.

Timber whitish, very hard.


662 =Kigelia æthiopica= _Decne._ ABUSHUTŪR, ABU SIDRA, UMSHUTUR &
MASHTURA—Arab; TIMLA (Dilling)—Nuba; KUBULI—Bari; RĀWAR (Kenissa) &
RUWĀL (Jonglei)—Dinka; GAFA—Golo; NAK & LUEL—Nuer; RANGBARANGBO—Zande.
The “Sausage-tree.”

Large tree. Leaves ternate, pinnate; leaflets 7-11, oblong-elliptic or
obovate, coriaceous, 3-5 in. long. Fl. in long pendulous, lax panicles.
Calyx campanulate, 2-lipped 1 in. long; cor. purple-maroon, 3 in. long;
st. 4 and 1 staminode. Fr. subcylindric up to 2 ft. long, 3-4 in. broad,
pendulous on long peduncles; seeds wingless, thick.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s
Post); Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (many parts); Mongalla Prov.

Wood, heavy, hard, yellowish with red spots, hard to work. Branch-wood
used for bows. The ashes of the fruit are considered an efficient
substitute for boracic powder for cleansing wounds of animals.


=K. æthiopica= _Decne._ =var. abyssinica= _Spr._

Corolla smaller; the cylindric basal portion of tube 1 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


                             =PEDALIACEÆ.=


663 =Rogeria adenophylla= _Gay._ SIMSIM AFRĪT (Kordn.), & SAKARAN—Arab;
SUKOSUKO (J. Ghulfan)—Nuba.

Stout and tall woody herb. Leaves opp., broadly obovate, more or less
3-lobed 2-4 in. long, mealy glandular, dentate. Fl. 1-3 in axils of
leaves, ped. short with a gland at base of each; cor. maroon, ab. 2 in.
long, tube funnel-shaped, gibbous at base, limb ¾ in. diam., 5-lobed.
Caps. obliquely ovoid with 4 to 8 spines at base.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, J. Waratab); Berber Prov. (Atbara); Khartoum
Prov. (J. Auli); Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa, Sennar); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol, banks of the White Nile, El Dueim to Tonga, Upper White Nile
Prov., Rocky hills); Kordofan Prov.

The plant affords a mucilaginous infusion which is useful in cases of
diarrhœa.


664 =Sesamum angustifolium= _Engl._

Tall herb. Leaves lin.-lanceolate 1-3 in. long, pubescent above,
glaucous below. Fl. solitary, axillary; cor. pink, obliquely
campanulate, 1-1½ in. long, obscurely 2-lipped. Caps. ¾ in. long,
oblong, beaked.

Banks of the White Nile; Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla).


=S. radiatum= _Schumach._

Mealy-glandular herb. Lower leaves ovate, toothed, 2½ in. long, upper
lanceolate, up to 4 in. long. Fl. solitary, axillary; cor. purple and
white, 1½ in. long, obliquely campanulate, 2-lipped, lowest lobe ⅓ in.
long. Caps. 1 in. long, shortly beaked, pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur).


=S. indicum= _Linn._ SIMSIM—Arab; NIUM—Nuer; SĀRAH—Zande. Sesame.

Mealy glandular and pubescent herb, up to 6 ft. high. Leaves variable,
the lowest 3-partite, 3-6 in. long, pet. 4-6 in., gradually passing
above to lanceolate, 2-4 in. long with shorter pet.; cor. white, tinged
with pink, 1 in. long. Caps. 1 in. long, with short deltoid beak.

Cultivated. Berber Prov. (Korkos Island between Berber & Khartoum);
White Nile Prov. (sub-wild on rocky hills); Fung Prov. (cultivated);
Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

Cultivated for its seed which yields the valuable Sesame seed of
commerce. Also wild or sub-wild on rocky hills near the White Nile.


=S. alatum= _Thonn._ SIMSIM—Arab.

Glabrous herb, 2-3 ft. high; stems quadrangular. Leaves varying from
5-fol. below to simple, lin.-lanceolate above, all long-petioled. Cor.
pink to carmine, spotted in throat, 1 in. long, obliquely campanulate,
2-lipped, lobes subequal. Caps. 2 in. long; beak slender, up to ½ in.
Seeds 2-winged, wing orbicular.

Cultivated. Berber Prov. (Atbara); Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Um Gash, & between Aguri & Taiara); Darfur
Prov. (20 m. N. of Fasher).


665 =Ceratotheca sesamoides= _Endl._ WEIKAT EL BADEIB (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Glaucous, bushy herb, ½-2 ft. high. Leaves deltoid to hastate, densely
mealy-glandular. Fl. solitary, axillary; cor. pale-lilac, throat yellow
with purple lines, ab. 1 in. long, obscurely 2-lipped, lower lobes ¾ in.
long. Caps. ½-¾ in. long, hairy, furnished with 2 apical horns.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid, Taiara); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).

It is eaten as a vegetable.


                             =ACANTHACEÆ.=


666 =Thunbergia affinis= _S. Moore._

Woody herb, 6-7 ft. high. Leaves opp. as in all this family, ovate,
acuminate, 4½ in. long; pet. ¾ in. with 2 thorns at base. Fl. solitary,
enclosed by 2 ovate bracteoles, giving a false appearance of a calyx, 1¼
in. long; calyx lobes 5 dotted with white scales; cor. tube yellow, 1¾
in. long; lobes violet, ½ in. long. Caps. 1 in. long, beaked.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land:
Naporruporru River).


=T. annua= _Hochst._

Hairy marsh herb. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, 4 in. long, sessile. Fl.
solitary on short peduncle; bracteoles 2, ovate, keeled; cor. white (?),
tube ½ in. long; lobes 5, ⅛ in. long; st. 4, anthers with 2 spurs at
base. Caps. beaked.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan
Prov. (Abu Gerad).


=T. annua= _Hochst._ =var. Ruspolii= _Burkill._

More hairy. Leaves subtruncate at base; bracteoles hirsute.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


=T. hispida= _Solm._

Hispidly white herb; stems 4-angled. Leaves elliptic-oblong, 1 in. long.
Fl. solitary; bracteoles 2, ovate-acuminate; cor. white, lobes 5; st. 4,
anthers 2-spurred below. Caps. 1 in. long, glandular.

Fung Prov. (Roseires); Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River: between
Abwong and Nasser).


=T. alata= _Boj._

Climbing, pilose herb. Leaves ovate sagittate or hastate, 2½ in. long;
pet. 1-2 in. long, winged. Fl. solitary on 2 in. long peduncles;
bracteoles ovate, 1 in. long; cor. tube claret-coloured 1/5 in. long;
lobes 5, yellow to white, ab. ½ in. long; anthers 4, 2 upper ones
1-spurred, 2 lower 2-spurred. Caps. ¾ in. long, seeds 4.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=T. Schweinfurthii= _S. Moore._

Strigose herb. Leaves narrowly lanceolate, 2½ in. long, hastate. Fl.
solitary, peduncles ab. 1 in. long; bracteoles ovate-lanceolate, white
with green veins. Cor. 1¼ in. long, lobes small; st. 4, 2 anthers
1-spurred.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: near Zeriba Kutshuk Ali).


667 =Elytraria crenata= _Vahl._

Dwarf pubescent herb. Leaves alt., crowded near the base, 2-7 in. long,
spathulate or oblanceolate, crenate or sinuate. Scapes several, 2-9 in.
high, covered with small bracts; spikes simple or compound; bracteoles
2; calyx 4-partite; cor. white or pale blue, ⅓ in. long, 2-lipped,
5-lobed. Caps. ovoid, ⅙ in. long.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: by the Yuru River).


668 =Nelsonia campestris= _R. Br._

Small villous, diffuse herb. Leaves opp., elliptic, variable in size.
Spikes 1-3 in. long imbricated; bracts ovate; bracteoles 0; cor. usually
pale lilac or white, 2-lipped, 5-lobed; st. 2. Caps. oblong, ¼ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Roseires and Fazoghli); Upper White Nile Prov. (Taufikia);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land, Mvolo and Ngama, Niamniam-land,
Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov.


669 =Hygrophila spinosa= _T. Anders._ MASHIKA & SHUEIKA (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Arab; TĪL (or ATIL) (Meshra El Zeraf & Kenissa)—Dinka.

Bushy spiny herb, growing in marshy ground. Leaves oblanceolate, hispid,
3-4 in. long, opp. or whorled with 6 spines 1 in. long at their base.
Fl. in dense axillary clusters with many linear or lanceolate bracts;
cor. mauve, 2-lipped, upper one forming a hood, tube ½ in. long, lip ⅓
in. long. Caps. ⅓ in. long; seeds 4-8, placed on small brackets
(retinacula) and covered with fine hairs (hygroscopic) which uncurl when
wetted.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung. Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile
Prov. (Jebelein southwards, J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (several
places); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ghabat El Arab and Bongo-land); Mongalla
Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Zalingei).

The whole plant or its ashes and the roots are used as a cooling
medicine and diuretic in cases of hepatic obstruction, dropsy,
rheumatism, etc. The seeds are demulcent and diuretic.


=H. cærulea= _T. Anders._

Bushy pilose herb. Leaves narrowly obovate, ½-¾ in. long, sessile. Fl.
in short terminal spikes; bracts linear; calyx segments 5, filiform, ¼
in. long; cor. ⅔ in. long, 2-lipped, upper hooded; st. 4 unequal. Caps.
¼ in. long, many seeded; seeds as above.

White Nile Prov. (J. Musa, El Ehs); Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. El Glet and Um
Kheren).


670 =Dyschoriste Perrottetii= _O. Kuntze._

Undershr. 3-4 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate, up to 3½ in. long. Fl. 3-8,
clustered; bracteoles 2, lin.-oblong; calyx ⅓ in. long, 5-partite; cor.
½ in. long, tube inflated, lobes 5, subequal. Caps. ab. ⅓ in. long;
seeds 4, hygroscopic.

Fung. Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: River Tidju,
Mittu-land).


671 =Ruellia patula= _Jacq._

Small shrub. Leaves in subequal pairs, ovate or elliptic, ½-2½ in. long,
grey-pubescent. Cymes small, axillary, enclosed in ¾ in. long
spathulate-oblong bracteoles; cor. mauve or white, 1⅓ in. long, tube
inflated, lobes 5, subequal, spreading. Caps. ½ in. long, club-shaped;
seeds ab. 12, hygroscopic.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Nubian coast); Khartoum Prov. (J. Royan); White
Nile Prov. (Jebelein); Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla Prov.; Darfur Prov.
(Jebel Marra, Niurnya, 6,500 ft.).


=R. prætermissa= _Lindau._

Much as above. Leaves somewhat larger and more pointed, nearly glabrous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, & Bongo-land: Gir & Niamniam-land).


=R. genduana= _C. B. Clarke._

Small shrub. Leaves up to 3 in. long, elliptic-lanceolate or orbicular,
glabrous. Caps. hairy otherwise as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Gendua River).


672 =Paulowilhelmia sclerochiton= _Lindau._

Shrub. Leaves ovate, toothed, long petioled. Fl. in scorpioid, axillary,
lax cymes or terminal panicles; calyx 5-part., ½ in. long; cor. tube 1
in. long, inflated, lobes 5, subequal. Caps. under ½ in. long; seeds 4,
hygroscopic.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Assika River).


673 =Phaylopsis falcisepala= _C. B. Clarke._

Branched herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., often unequal and oblique,
ovate, acuminate, up to 3 in. long. Fl. sessile in threes, in axils of
large dense imbricated bracts in a close one-sided inflor.; sepals 5 of
which 2 are falcate; cor. white or purplish, tube ¼ in., lobes 5,
2-lipped. Caps. ¼ in. long; seeds 4, hygroscopic.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


=P. Barteri= _T. Anders._

Shrubby herb 1-3 ft. high. Leaves ovate to oblong, acuminate both ends,
up to 4½ in. long. Fl. in dense imbricate (strobilate) spikes 2½ in.
long; calyx segments 5, from elliptic to linear; cor. tube ⅓ in. long,
inflated above. Caps. and seeds as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Addai & Dimo in Jur-land).


674 =Satanocrater fellatensis= _Schwfth._

Undershrub. Leaves elliptic or broad-lanceolate, 3 in. long. Fl.
solitary, opp. in the leaf-axils; calyx tubular, inflated, 5-angled and
5-toothed, 1 in. long; cor. blue, tube inflated, ab. 2 in. long, lobes
5, subequal, ½ in. long; st. 4. Caps. oblong; seeds 4 discoid and
hygroscopic.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Fellata village).


675 =Hemigraphis abyssinica= _C. B. Clarke._

Pubescent wiry herb. Leaves elliptic, ⅔ in. long, subsessile. Fl. in
axillary clusters and quasi-terminal spikes; sepals 5, hairy, ¼ in.
long; cor. ¼ in. long, tubular and 5-lobed; st. 4. Caps. cylindric;
seeds 6-12, hygroscopic on stout retinacula.

Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (El Ehs); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between
Chak Chak & Deim Zubeir).


=H. Schweinfurthii= _C. B. Clarke._

Pubescent herb, ½-1 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate, up to 2 in. long,
tapering to both ends. Fl. much as above.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River: mouth of Khor Filus); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi, & Mittu-land: Rivers Roa & Wokko).


676 =Blepharis bœrhaaviæfolia= _Pers._

Procumbent shrubby herb. Leaves 4-nate in distant whorls, elliptic, 1½
in. long, sessile. Fl. in axil of terminal bract in a bracteate spike;
bract ⅓ in. long, spathulate with 7-15 spines at margin; cor. blue, ½
in. long, 1-lipped. Caps. ¼ in. long; seeds 2, hygroscopic.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Bongo-land: Roah River).


=B. linariifolia= _Pers._ BEGHEIL or UM BEGEIL—Arab.

Low growing woody herb. Leaves linear, up to 3 in. long. Bracteate
spikes in the axils of the branches, 1-3 in. long; bracts up to 1 in.
long, ovate abruptly pointed and recurved, with 6 brown spines;
bracteoles linear; cor. deep blue, 1 in. long, 1-lipped; st. 4; anthers
hairy, filaments of 2 antichous stamens bearing a horn-like appendage.
Capsule ovoid; seeds 2, hygroscopic.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur
Prov. (Kulme).

It is said to be the favourite food of Oryx leucoryx and of camels.


=B. edulis= _Pers._

Bushy woody herb. Leaves 4-nate, up to 2 in. long, 1 pair smaller,
oblong or narrow elliptic, spinescent. Fl. in strobilate spikes up to 4
in. long; bracts 1½ in. long, ovate, acuminate, recurved, spiny; cor.
blue, ¾ in. long. Caps. ¼ in. long; seeds 2, hygroscopic.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L., coastland); Nubia (between North Atbara, Khors
in Desert); Khartoum Prov. (rocky hills); Kordofan Prov.

A good camel fodder.


677 =Acanthus arboreus= _Forsk._

Stout shrub, up to 20 ft. high. Leaves spinous lobed or sub-pinnatifid,
up to 12 × 6 in. Spikes 1-3, terminal, up to 10 in. long, by 2 in.
broad; bracts 1½ in. long, spinous as well as (2) bracteoles; calyx
spiny, 4-fid; cor. rose or pale purple, 1¾ in. long, 1-lipped. Caps. ¾
in. long; seeds glabrous.

Blue Nile Prov. (Fazoghli).


=A. montanus= _T. Anders._

Up to 3 ft. high, otherwise much as above, but flowers and capsule
larger and leaves caudate.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


678 =Barleria candida= _Nees._

Prickly undershrub with long white tubular flowers. Seeds shaggy,
hygroscopic as all in this genus.

Khartoum Prov. (rocky hills).


=B. Prionitis= _Linn._

Bushy herb, ab. 18 in. high. Leaves elliptic, usually ab. 3-4 in. long
with fascicles of spines at their base. Fl. axillary, solitary or 2
together; cor. buff-coloured, 2-lipped, 1-1½ in. long. Caps. ovoid,
beaked, 2-seeded.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (J. Daier).

It is said to yield a gum. In India the juice of the leaves is used in
catarrhal affections of children. It is also used to harden the feet and
thus prevent the soles from cracking.


=B. diacantha= _Nees._

Very similar to preceding but spines often paired and about 1 in. long.

No locality (fide Mrs. Crowfoot).


=B. trispinosa= _Vahl._ OT-HAUK—Hadendowa.

Bushy herb; interpetiolar spines 2-3 together, up to 1 in. long. Fl. in
terminal imbricate heads 1-2 in. long, yellow, 2-lipped, otherwise as
above.

Red Sea Prov. (near Erkowit).


=B. grandicalyx= _Lindau._

Hispid herb, 1 ft. high. Leaves obovate-oblong, 2 in. long; interpet.
spines ⅓ in. long. Fl. solitary; calyx ¾ in. spinous; cor. pale blue,
tube ¾ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, Wau, Mittu-land: Rohl River);
Upper White Nile Prov.


=B. acanthoides= _Vahl._

Prickly, densely white-hairy undershr. Leaves elliptic-oblong, 1-2 in.
long; interpet. spines 2-4 together. Racemes 2-8 fl., scorpioid; bracts
spinous; cor. white; tube 3 in. long; lobes ⅓ in. long. Caps. ½ in.,
seeds 4.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Khartoum Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Barkin).


=B. spinulosa= _Klotzsch._

Tomentose and glandular-hairy herb. Leaves elliptic, up to 3 in. long.
Fl. in axillary compact bracteate racemes 1-8 flowered; bracts and
sepals ab. ½ in. long, spine-toothed; cor. pale-blue, ¾ in. long, lobes.
Caps. ½ in. long, seeds 4, hygroscopic.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli).


=B. parviflora= _R. Br._

Unarmed shrubby herb with appressed white hairs. Leaves elliptic-ovate,
up to 1¼ in. long, sessile. Cymes lax, 1-3 flowered; bracts ⅓ in. long,
broad lanceolate; 2 outer calyx segments ¼ in. long; cor. ⅔ in. long.
Caps. ⅓ in. long, pubescent, beaked; seeds 2, hygroscopic.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=B. eranthemoides= _R. Br._

Spiny and bushy plant, not unlike _B. Prionitis_, but cor. tube 1 in.
long, linear to top; lobes 5, yellow, sub-equal, ⅓-½ in. long, not
2-lipped.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=B. Hochstetteri= _Nees._

Unarmed undershrub, with minute rough hairs. Leaves elliptic, ab. 1¾ in.
long; pet. short. Cymes few-flowered, lax; 2 outer calyx segments,
nearly ½ in. long, ovate; cor. tube ½ in. long, lobes ⅓-½ in. Caps.
nearly ½ in. long; seeds 2, hygroscopic.

Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi Omareg); White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Sungur).


=B. calophylla= _Lindau._

Unarmed herb, up to 1½ ft. high. Leaves oblong, up to 4 in. long,
sessile, rounded or cordate. Infl. in 1-3 flowered axillary racemes,
crowded at top into an oblong head; bracts ⅔ in. long; calyx segments
varying from 1 to 1½ in. long; cor. white or pinkish, tube 1½ in. long,
lobes 1¼ in. long. Caps. ¾ in; seeds 4.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumba & Bongo-land: Addai).


=B. ventricosa= _Nees._

Scrambling, spiny herb or undershr., 3-6 ft. high. Leaves strigose with
tawny hairs, up to 2 in. long, yellowish-green. Fl. in axillary cymes
forming a less dense head than above; bracts ½ in. long; sepals 5,
postichous one quadrate-oblong, ½ in. long; cor. ½ in. long, blue or
purple, funnel-shaped; lobes 5. Caps. ½ in. long, ellipsoid; seeds 2.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Khor Mashisha near Dilling).


=B. Grantii= _Oliv._

Scrambling herb or undershr. Leaves ovate, 2 in. long, hairy, dark
green. Cymes 1-2 flowered, axillary and running into terminal spikes;
bracts ¾ in. long, linear; postichous sepal ¾ in. long, ovate; cor. deep
purple; tube ⅔ in., long, inflated, lobes ⅔ in. long. Caps. ½ in. long;
seeds 2.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambe).


679 =Neuracanthus niveus= _S. Moore._

Undershrub. Leaves broadly elliptic, up to 4 in. long, white stellate-
tomentose beneath. Fl. in axillary sessile ovoid heads, white-hairy;
bracts ½ in. long; calyx 2-partite, antichous segment 2-fid, postichous
3-fid; cor. ⅔ in. long, funnel-shaped, lobes 5, triangular. Caps. ovoid,
beaked, small. Seeds 2-4 hygroscopic.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


680 =Crossandra nilotica= _Oliv._

Herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves elliptic, up to 4 in. long. Fl. in imbricate,
bracteate spikes, 1-2½ in. long; bracts ab. ½ in. long, obovate-
elliptic; calyx 5-partite, postichous segment with 2 hairy teeth; cor.
brick-red, tube ¾ in. long, lobes 5, ½ in. long. Caps. ⅓ in. long,
elliptic; seeds 4, hygroscopic.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat River: Itang); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

=var. acuminata= _Lindau._

Tip of bracts more acute than above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: near Biselli).


=C. subacaulis= _C. B. Clarke._

Almost acaulescent herb. Leaves basal, crowded, obovate, up to 6 in.
long, sessile. Fl. on peduncles up to 5 in. long, bearing loose spikes
up to 4 in. long; bracts 5-9 nerved, otherwise fl. as in above.

Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Bongo lands);
Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla); Moru-land.


681 =Asystasia coromandeliana= _Nees._

Herb up to 4 ft. high. Leaves ovate, 3 in. long, suddenly narrowed at
base. Racemes 2-6 in. long, often forming a terminal panicle; cor. lilac
to yellow or white; tube ¾ in. long, inflated; limb 5-fid; st. 4, each
1-2 spurred. Caps. 1 in. long; seeds 4, not hygroscopic.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli, Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land:
Mvolo); Mongalla Prov.; Darfur (Kulme).


682 =Eranthemum decurrens= _Nees._

Herb or undershr. Leaves ovate, 4-9 in. long, decurrent into petiole.
Fl. 1-3 together on bracteate 4-6 in. long spikes pubescent and with
stalked glands; bracts minute; sepals small, equal; cor. yellow with red
centre, tube 1 in. long; perfect st. 2. Caps. 1 in. long; seeds 4,
hairless.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Dimo).


=E. hypocrateriforme= _Roem._ & _Schultes._ ERG EL NIMR—Arab;
MERZIS—Hameg.

Shrub, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves ovate or elliptic, 3½ in. long, white-
dotted. Panicles linear, 2-7 in. long; axillary cymes dense; cor.
scarlet, tube 1 in. long, lobes 5 spreading, ½ in. long; perfect st. 2.
Caps. 1¼ in. long; seeds 4, hairless.

Fung Prov.

The root ground to a paste is given in merissa for stomach-ache.


683 =Lepidagathis scariosa= _Nees._

Herb, woody below. Leaves elliptic to ovate, 2 in. long, grey hairy
beneath. Fl. in terminal ovoid heads, with soft prickles and gland-
tipped hairs; cor. 2-lipped, 1 in. long; st. 4; caps. ⅓ in. long; seeds
4, hygroscopic.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (30 miles E. of
Zalingei).


=L. Schweinfurthii= _Lindau._

Low herb, woody below. Leaves linear, 4 in. long, crowded at base except
on 1 or more elongated leaf-bearing shoots, ab. 6 in. long. Fl. mostly
in dense hairy radical heads; cor. white with purple spots, ⅔ in. long;
st. 4; seeds hygroscopic.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=L. radicalis= _Nees._

Differs from above by more hairy, shorter and slightly broader leaves.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Ghebeish near J. Eliri); Mongalla Prov.; Darfur Prov.
(Jebel Marra: Goluberi Volcano, 8,000 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).


=L. myrtifolia= _S. Moore._

Woody plant, apparently rooting on trees or rocks, ab. 2-3 ft. high;
branches flexuous. Leaves elliptic, 1 in. long, subsessile. Fl. in
radical and axillary dense ovoid white-hairy heads; bracts ⅓ in. long;
sepals 5; cor. 2-lipped, ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Gir).


=L. perglabra= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous except for margins of floral leaves. Leaves linear, 3-nerved,
3¼ in. long. Fl. in axillary heads.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Ngoli).


=L. peniculifera= _S. Moore._

Stout woody plant. Leaves linear, 1¼ in. long, tips acute, with long
white hairs. Spikes compound, 2 in. long, one-sided, 1 to 2 together;
bracts dense, leathery, ovate mucronate; sep. 5, ⅓ in. long, hairy and
leathery; cor. ⅔ in. long; st. 4.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Reggo).


=L. Medusæ= _S. Moore._

Stout villous plant. Leaves 4 in. by ½ in., 5-nerved. Spikes unilateral,
compound, 1-2 together in upper axils, 1½ in. long; bracts ovate with
long deflexed white hairy tails; sepals 5, also with ⅓ in. long tails;
cor. ⅔ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Ngoli).


=L. laguroidea= _T. Anders._

Woody plant; young parts minutely pubescent. Leaves ovate to narrow-
elliptic, 2 in. long, narrowed both ends. Spikes terminal, 2 in. long,
not imbricate; bracts lin.-lanceolate; cor. ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: Mvolo).


684 =Justicia Betonica= _Linn._

Shrubby, nearly glabrous herb. Leaves ovate, acuminate to both ends, 3
in. long. Spikes imbricate, 4½ in. long; bracts somewhat 4-ranked,
ovate, ⅓ in. long, white with green nerves; bracteoles similar, smaller;
cor. white, rose-spotted, ½ in. long, 2-lipped; st. 2, one anther cell
below the other, long-tailed. Caps. ½ in. long, hairy; seeds 4, rugose.

Kordofan Prov.


=J. betonicoides= _C. B. Clarke._

As above, but leaves subsessile, oblong or lanceolate, hairy beneath and
on nerves above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Mittu- & Bongo-lands).


=J. flava= _Vahl._ MAHBAB (White Nile Prov.)—Arab.

Hairy herb, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, up to 3 in. long,
both surfaces hairy; pet. ⅔ in. long. Spikes terminal, 4-8 in. long,
sometimes interrupted at base; bracts ab. ½ in. long, lanceolate,
containing 1-3 fl., green, hairy; bracteoles similar but smaller; sep.
5, small, hairy; cor. yellow; st. 2, one anther cell below the other,
tailed. Caps. ⅓ in. long; seeds 4, shortly hairy.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib, Suakin & Erkowit); Fung Prov. (Saoleil);
White Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf, Sobat: mouth
of Khor Filus).


=J. palustris= _T. Anders._

Leaves oblong tapering to both ends, 6½ in. long; pet. short, otherwise
much as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov.


=J. insularis= _T. Anders._

Scrambling hispid herb. Leaves lanceolate-oblong, 3½ in. long; pet. ¼-1
in. long. Fl. 1-3 in axil of each bract; bracts round or obovate, ⅓ in.
long; cor. white with purple mark on lower lip which is 3-lobed and the
longer; st. 2 as above. Caps. ⅓ in., seeds 4, rugose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambe).


=J. calcarata= _Hochst._

Herb with woody rootstock; branches with spreading hairs. Leaves 3 × 1
in. tapering to both ends. Fl. 1-3 in axils of bracts; bracts ovate or
elliptic, ⅓ in. long; cor. purple, otherwise as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov. (El Obeid); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Gurfala).


=J. galeopsis= _T. Anders._

Much as _J. insularis_ but leaves oblong, subsessile, calyx more hispid;
cor. purple-red or yellow.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Darfur Prov. (Kulme, 3,600 ft.).


=J. sexangularis= _Lindau._

Herb, 18 in. high with 6-angled stem, scabrid hairy. Leaves oblong, up
to 2 in., subsessile. Fl. 1-3 in axils of oblong bracts; cor. purple, ½
in. long. Caps. ab. ¼ in. long, hairy; seeds 4, tubercled.

Kordofan Prov. (Melbes).


=J. Whytei= _S. Moore._

Hairy herb with stout woody rootstock. Leaves ovate to lanceolate. Fl.
1-3 in axils of bracts; cor. purple, ½ in. long. Caps. ¼ in. hairy;
seeds 4.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=J. heterocarpa= _T. Anders._

Pubescent annual, 8-20 in. high. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, 1½ in. long;
pet. ½-¾ in. Fl. in axillary clusters of 2 to many; sepals minute,
white-hairy; cor. ¼ in. long. Caps. of 2 kinds in same head, one
4-seeded, normal, and one 1-seeded and spinous-winged.

Red Sea Prov. (below Erkowit & 21° N. Lat.).


=J. odora= _Vahl._

Undershr., 1-2 ft. high. Leaves ovate or oblong, 1-3 in. long. Fl.
solitary to 3 in axils of bracts; cor. ½ in. long, yellow. Caps. ½ in.
long; seeds 4 tubercular-scabrous.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=J. anselliana= _T. Anders._ ABU NUWARA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; ALUME
(Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka.

Weak herb, 12 to 20 in. high. Leaves linear to lanceolate, 1¾ in. long
or ovate, ⅔ in. long. Fl. 2-8 in axillary scorpioid cymes; cor. ¼ in.
long. Caps. ⅓ in. long; seeds 4, wrinkled and more or less winged.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf
southwards, Sobat mouth); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Sabbi River); Bahr El
Jebel.


=J. matammensis= _Oliv._

Much like above; more pubescent and no leaves linear; cor. white.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Upper White
Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla).


=J. uncinulata= _Oliv._ =var. tenuicapsa= _C. B. Clarke._

Rootstock woody; branches 4-6 in. long. Leaves elliptic or ovate ½-⅔ in.
long. Spikes axillary, unilateral with few distant solitary flowers;
cor. ab. ¼ in. long. Caps. ¼ in., slender, hispid near top; seeds 4,
rugose.

Upper White Nile.


685 =Monechma hispidum= _Hochst._ SHAIIR (Goz El Siada)—Arab; TILL (Goz
El Siada)—Dinka; MELL—Burun.

Herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves 3 × ¾ in., hispid-scabrous or glabrate.
Spikes hispid with long white hairs, 4 in. long in fruit; bracts 1 in.
long, oblong, bracteoles ¾ in.; sepals 5, ⅓ in. long; cor. white,
spotted purple, ½ in. long, 2-lipped; st. 2, 1 anther-cell below the
other, long-tailed, tail 2-fid. Caps. ⅓ in. long; seeds 2 with tufts of
hair at either end.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov. (El Obeid); Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz El Siada); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=M. bracteatum= _Hochst._ FAKHAH (Sennar, Dinder)—Arab.

Herb, 1-3 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate, up to 4 in. long. Spikes
strobilate (imbricate) 2 in. long, axillary or terminal; bracts round,
ciliate, enclosing calyx which is 1/5 in. long, hairy; cor. ½ in. long;
st. as above. Caps. ¼ in. long, white-hairy; seeds 2, yellow-brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung, Kordofan & Darfur Provinces;
Red Sea Prov. (Karora Hills).


=M. varians= _C. B. Clarke._

Herb with woody rootstock, up to 18 in. high. Leaves elliptic-oblong, up
to 2 in. long, subsessile. Spikes terminal, 1¼ in. long, dense; bracts
oblong-elliptic, ½ in. long; bracteoles ⅓ in. long; sepals 5, glandular-
hairy, one smaller; cor. ½ in. long; anthers short-tailed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between River Biri & Deim Zubeir).


686 =Ecbolium linneanum= _Kurz._

Shrub. Leaves narrowly oblong to broadly ovate, up to 3 in. long. Spikes
terminal, 4 in. long: bracts strobilate ¾ in. long, ovate, apiculate,
often pubescent; bracteoles ¼ in. long, linear; sepals 5, linear; cor.
tube ab. 1 in. long, limb 2-lipped, ½ in.; st. 2, anthers nearly equal
height. Caps. ¾ in. long; seeds 2, rough edged.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat, Suakin, & 21° N. Lat.).


=E. Anisacanthus= _C. B. Clarke._

Small woody, densely white-hairy shrub. Leaves lin.-lanceolate, 1½ in.
long. Spikes terminal, 1¾ in. long, 8-12 flowered; bracts hardly
imbricate, elliptic, ½ in. long; bracteoles minute; calyx small,
2-lipped; cor. tube ⅓ in.; limb 2-lipped, ⅓ in. long. Anthers of equal
height. Caps ⅓ in. long; seeds 2, yellow, smooth, shining.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Ashat & Erkowit); Between Suakin & Berber (Wadi
Omari).


687 =Dicliptera maculata= _Nees._

Herb, 2-3 ft. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, 3½ in. long; pet. 1 in. Peduncles
axillary and terminal, 1-3 in. long; pedicels many, ¾ in. long; outer
bract under ½ in., elliptic, pubescent; bracteoles 2; sep. 5, ⅙ in.
long; cor. purple to white, deeply 2-lipped, ¾ in. long; st. 2, one
anther cell above the other. Caps. small, ovoid; seeds 2 or 4.

Æthiopia.


=D. micranthes= _Nees._ RAKAB—Arab.

Tall herb; stems 6-angled; angles whitened. Leaves elliptic, 3 in. long,
narrowed both ends. Spikelets in dense globose heads, ½-¾ in. diam.,
terminal and axillary; 2 bracts of the spikelet ab. ⅓ in. long, obovate-
lanceolate, suddenly narrowed into a spinescent mucro, with long white
hair; bracteoles shorter, linear; sepals 5, small; cor. ab. ½ in. long,
mauve. Caps. ⅙ in. long, somewhat hairy; seeds up to 4, tubercled.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Upper White
Nile Prov. (Khor Attar, Meshra El Zeraf).


=D. nilotica= _C. B. Clarke._

Herb, 4-8 in. high, pubescent. Leaves elliptic-oblong, up to 2 in. long.
Flower heads dense, small, terminal, or the axillary heads peduncled;
bracts lin.-oblong, hairy; sepals 5, small; cor. rose-purple to white, ¾
in. long, 2-lipped, lips unusually broad; 1 anther cell above the other.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


688 =Peristrophe bicalyculata= _Nees._ HERSHA (White Nile) & NA’ANA’A
(N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Tall, glabrous or hispid herb, branches 4-7 angular. Leaves elliptic-
lanceolate, up to 4 in. long. Panicles often 12-18 in. long, very lax,
much divided, spikelets with 1 perfect fl.; bracts 2, enclosing the
calyx and ⅓ in. long; bracteoles 2, calyx small; cor. pale-purple, ½ in.
long, 2-lipped; st. 2, 1 anther cell above the other. Caps. ⅓ in. long;
seeds 4, smooth or papillose.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat.); Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa);
Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Hilla Nu,
Bara, etc.); Mongalla Prov.

The Plant, macerated in water, is said to be a useful remedy for snake-
bite.


=P. luteoviridis= _C. B. Clarke._

Stout yellow-green herb. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, nearly 4 in. long,
narrowed both ends. Fl. clustered in dense spikes 3 in. long; spikelets
1-flowered; bracts and bractlets ½ in. long; calyx ⅓ in. long; cor.
rose, purple spotted, 1 in. long, 2-lipped; st. 2, anther cells nearly
at equal height. Caps. ¾ in. long; seeds 4, smooth, discoid.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Deim Bekir & Niamniam-land).


689 =Hypoestes cancellata= _Nees._ MAHALAB (Baggara)—Arab; EMBEILU
(Kadugli)—Nuba.

More or less hairy herb; stems 2 ft. high, bent at the joints. Leaves
oblong, up to 2 in. long. Heads mainly terminal, 1½ in. long, in dense
congested panicles, yellow, hispid; spikeless 1-flowered; bracts ½ in.
long, including a linear tail; cor. red ¾ in. long, 2-lipped. Caps. ¼
in. long; seeds 4, tubercled.

Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Addai).


=H. strobilifera= _S. Moore._

Pubescent herb, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves lin.-oblong, 5½ in. long. Heads
terminal, 1 in. long, densely strobilate; outer floral leaves
spathulate-obovate, with 1-3 spikelets under each; bracts 1/5 in.; sep.
small; cor. pale-lilac, ⅔ in. long, deeply 2-lipped; st. 2; anthers
1-celled, blunt. Caps. ⅓ in.; seeds 4, tubercled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Addai).


=H. Forskalei= _R. Br._

Nearly glabrous undershrub. Leaves elliptic-lanceolate, acuminate, 2 in.
long. Infl. axillary, forming a terminal panicle; spikelets in
unilateral cymes, 1½ in. long; 2 outer bracts connate; cor. mauve with
purple spots in throat, ½ in. long, deeply 2-lipped, upper lip and
central lobe of lower curled back; st. 2, abruptly club-shaped,
filaments with purple hairs. Caps. ¼ in. long; seeds 2, smooth.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Hefe); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra & over 6,500 ft.).


=H. verticillaris= _R. Br._ ABU FAS (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Stem with long and gland-tipped hairs mixed. Leaves ovate, sharply
narrowed to both ends, ab. 3 in. long. Bracts fringed with white hairs,
otherwise as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Roseires); White Nile,
Kordofan & Mongalla Provinces.

The roots are used at Meshra El Zeraf for dyeing mats.


                             =VERBENACEÆ.=


690 =Lantana viburnoides= _Vahl._

Erect hairy shrub. Leaves opp., ovate, 3-4 in. long, crenate. Spikes
dense, axillary, up to 1½ in. long; bracts ovate, up to ¼ in. long;
calyx 5-toothed, campanulate, small; cor. white, 5-lobed, ⅙ in. long.
Drupe fleshy, purple, size of a pea.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=L. salvifolia= _Jacq._

Hairy shrub. Leaves opp., ovate, 1-2 in. long, crenate. Spikes globose
to oblong, 1 in. long; bracts ovate, ¼ in. long; cor. lilac or pink, ⅓
in. long; limb patent ⅙ in. diam.; st. 4, didynamous. Drupe purple,
edible.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Has Has & Khor Tamanib); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam-land).


=L. petitiana= _Rich._

Hispid undershrub. Leaves opp., ovate, ½ in. long, crenate. Heads
globose, ⅓ in. diam.; bracts ovate, ⅙ in. long; cor. lilac, tube ⅙ in.
long, limb small, 5-lobed; st. and drupe as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land: Nabambisso
River).


691 =Lippia nodiflora= _Rich._ LIBBIA—Arab.

Trailing herb, rooting at the nodes. Leaves opp. or fascicled, obovate,
dentate in upper half. Spikes globose to oblong, ¼ in. diam.; bracts
small; cor. small, purplish.

Red Sea Prov. (coast); Khartoum & Blue Nile Provinces.

Suited for an edging plant in gardens and used for lawns.


=L. Radula= _Baker._

Woolly herb, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves ternate, oblong, up to 4 in. long,
sessile, crenate. Heads oblong, ½ in. long, several together in a
terminal panicle; bracts imbricate, orbicular, ⅙ in. diam.; cor. length
of bract, 4-lobed; st. 4.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi River).


=L. adoensis= _Hochst._

Erect, shortly pubescent undershrub, 5-7 ft. high. Leaves 2-4 or more-
whorled, oblong, up to 5 in. long. Heads globose forming a terminal
panicle; bracts ovate; cor. 4-lobed, minute, white; st. 4.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land); Bahr El Jebel (Upper).


=L. citriodora= _H.B._ & _K._ LUWEIS—Arab.

Introduced (Makwar); Blue Nile Prov.


692 =Bouchea pterygocarpa= _Schauer._

White pubescent undershrub. Leaves opp., ovate, 1½ in. long. Spikes 6-9
in. long, terminal; fl. in axil of a bract, appressed to rachis; cor.
scarlet, tube ½ in. long; limb patent, lobes 5, st. 4, didynamous. Caps.
winged at apex.

Nubia; Blue Nile Prov. (near Jebel Saggadi); Kordofan Prov. (Jebel Kuhn,
Melbes).


=B. marrubiifolia= _Schauer._ DANABĀN or ERG EL BUGR (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

White pubescent, branched herb, much like above. Cor. white; capsule not
winged.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber, Okurr, Wadi Abu Kotod); Red Sea Prov.
(Suakin, Khor Tamanib); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Gerad, Wadi Taiara, Um Marba
& Um Dam).


693 =Stachytarpheta angustifolia= _Vahl._ ABONGANDUR (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Arab; ADELFUR (Meshra El Zeraf)—Dinka; DELPA (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Shilluk.

Bushy herb with 4-angled stems. Leaves opp., oblong-lanceolate, 2-3 in.
long, deeply crenate. Spikes very slender, 6-9 in. long; rachis hollowed
to receive appressed flowers; bracts ⅓ in. long; calyx as long,
5-toothed and ribbed; cor. lilac, ⅔ in. long; limb patent, 5-lobed; st.
2. Fr. cylindrical, ¼ in. long.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf to Sobat Mouth); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Shambe).

The roots are used by Arabs as collyrium.


694 =Priva leptostachya= _Juss._

Bushy hairy herb; stems 4-angled. Leaves opp., ovate, 1-3 in. long,
crenate; spikes 6-12 in. long; fl. lax on a square rachis; bracts small;
calyx ¼ in. long enlarging in fruit; cor. ½ in. long, white, limb ¼ in.
diam., 2-lipped, white; st. 4, didynamous. Fr. enclosed in enlarged
calyx; nutlets 2.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber, Wadi El Omari); Red Sea Prov. (Suakin,
Jebel Waratab).


695 =Verbena supina= _Linn._ MORREYA (Ehrenb.)—Arab.

Densely pubescent annual. Leaves opp., bipinnatifid, deltoid. Spikes
dense; bracts and calyx minute; cor. lilac, tube ⅙ in. long, limb
patent, 5-lobed, 1/12 in. diam.; st. 4, didynamous. Caps. minute.

Nubia; Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (Sodari);
Darfur Prov.


=V. officinalis= _Linn._

Glabrous perennial. Leaves rhomboid-ovate, deeply pinnatifid. Spikes lax
in a terminal panicle. Fl. as above; cor. limb ⅙ in. diam.

Fung Prov.

The leaves are considered a febrifuge and tonic and are said to be used
as a rubefacient in rheumatism and diseases of the joints. The root is
believed to be a remedy for scrofula and snake-bite.


696 =Duranta Plumieri= _Jacq._

Unarmed or spinous shrub. Leaves opp., oblong, sometimes crenate.
Racemes long, terminal; cor. lilac, ⅓ in. long; lobes 5, spreading, ⅓
in. diam. St. 4, didynamous. Drupe yellow, size of a pea, enclosed in
enlarged calyx.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Atasilli River); Mongalla Prov.
(Lado: Yei River District).

An excellent hedge plant.


697 =Premna resinosa= _Schauer._ SAAT—Arab; TŪR (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Shrub with scented leaves. Leaves 2-4-nate, ovate or oblong, ½-1½ in.
long, entire or crenate. Panicles small, terminal, corymbose; fl.
minute, whitish or greenish. Drupe black, size of a pea.

Nubia (Wadi Omari); Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Sinkat, Jebel Waratab & 21°
N.L.); Kordofan Prov. (Melbes, Abu Haraza, Abu Snun, Wadi Taiara &
between Obeid Ogari & El Mareikib & Melbes); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol).

Fruit eaten.


698 =Vitex tangensis= _Gürke._

Shrub or small tree, clothed with yellowish hairs. Leaves opp.,
digitately 3-fol.; leaflets 2-3 in. long, oblong-lanceolate. Cymes
corymbose, axillary; calyx campanulate, 5-toothed; cor. tube twice
length of calyx, limb patent, white (?); st. 4, exserted. Fr. globose, 1
in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Wau & Chakchak).


=V. madiensis= _Oliv._

Tree. Leaves opp., simple or 3-5 fol., glabrous above, hairy beneath;
leaflets obovate-cuneate, crenate in upper half, 5-6 in. cymes; calyx
5-toothed, minute; cor. ¼ in. long, limb long; pet. 3-4 in. long. Fl. in
axillary, corymbose, hairy patent. Fr. edible, size of a small plum.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas & Kutshook Ali’s Zariba, Dinka-
land, Mittu-land: Mvolo, Niamniam-land); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).

Fruit edible.


=V. Schweinfurthii= _Baker._

Tree; extremities drab pubescent. Leaves simple or 3-fol.; leaflets
obovate-cuneate, up to 6 in. long; main petiole 2-3 in. long. Cymes lax,
axillary; bracts large, linear. Fl. much as above.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Talodi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas & Gir &
Dinka-land: Lau).


=V. Cienkowskii= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._ ABDUGULGUL, UMDIGULGUL or GULGUL
(Baggara), ZEITUN (Bahr El Ghazal Prov.), or KURAIN—Arab; KLURUF (J.
Daier), TIDOGI & MADIMU (J. Eliri)—Nuba; KONINK (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka;
ORO—Golo; YALAH—Jur.

Large tree. Leaves 5-fol., glabrous; leaflets obovate-cuneate, up to 6
in. long, distinctly petioled; main pet. 2-3 in. long. Cymes dense,
axillary, long peduncled; calyx 5-toothed, minute; cor. yellowish-brown,
ab. ½ in. long, limb obliquely patent. Fr. size of a cherry, edible.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Upper White Nile
Prov. (mouth of Bahr El Ghazal); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dinka-land,
between Wau & Chak Chak, & Tonj; Jur: Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi).

Wood white, light. Fruit eaten and when roasted is said to be a
substitute for tea.


699 =Clerodendron acerbianum= _Boiss._

Riverside shrub; bark grey and rough; extremities, leaves and infl.
grey-woolly. Leaves 2-4-nate, ovate, rounded or slightly cordate at
base, 2-3 in. long. Fl. in dense terminal and axillary clusters; bracts
linear, ¾ in. long; calyx ¾ in. long, 5-lobed; cor. white, tube 1 in.
long, lobes 5, ovate, ⅙ in. long; st. 4, exserted. Fr. somewhat like a
black-berry, not edible.

Berber Prov. (Mograd Island); Fung Prov. (Bunzaga & Jongol’s Post);
White Nile Prov. (Jebelein to Sobat); Sobat River (near Nasser).


=C. Schweinfurthii= _Gürke._

Climbing shrub. Leaves opp., ovate-lanceolate, 6-8 in. long, often
serrate. Fl. in axillary long-peduncled heads; calyx tube campanulate;
cor. tube 1½ in. long, lobes 5; st. 4, much exserted as well as style.
Drupe black, ⅓ in. long. Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso
River); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. Formicarum= _Gürke._

Shrub. Leaves 2-4-nate, oblong, 2-3 in. long. Fl. in subumbellate
terminal panicles; cor. white, tube ¼ in. long, lobes 5, minute; st. 4,
¼ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. harnierianum= _Schweinf._

Shrub; branchlets 4-angled. Leaves 2-3-nate, oblong or oblong-
lanceolate, 2 in. long, pubescent. Infl. a cymose terminal panicle;
calyx ⅓ in. long, 5-lobed; cor. purple, ab. 1 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Roseires); White Nile Prov.


=C. cordifolium= _A. Rich._

Undershr. or shrub, erect or scandent. Leaves opp., ovate-cordate, 3-4
in. long, pubescent beneath. Cymes lax, forming an ample terminal
panicle; calyx 5-toothed, ⅓ in. long; cor. white, tube ⅔ in. long, lobes
5, ⅓ in. long; st. 4, 1 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Darfur Prov. (Kulme & J. Marra 6,000 ft.); Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas & East of Limo’s village); Bahr El
Jebel (Madi).


=C. capitatum= _Schumach._ & _Thonn._

Small shrub; branchlets densely hairy. Leaves opp., broadly ovate-
dentate, pubescent beneath, 6-12 in. long. Fl. in dense sessile terminal
heads, 6-9 in. diam.; bracts red, lanceolate, foliaceous; calyx ¾ in.
long, pubescent, segments ciliate; cor. white, tube slender, 3-4 in.
long; lobes ½ in. Drupe black in red accrescent calyx.

Nuba Mts. Prov. (Kadugli).


=C. myricoides= _R. Br._ HAMALMA—Rashida (Red Sea Prov.).

Shrub, 3-5 ft. high. Leaves 2-4-nate, subsessile, oblong, 2-6 in. long,
toothed. Cymes lax; calyx small, 5-lobed; cor. tubes short; lobes, upper
½ in. long, white, lower ¾ in. long, pale blue; st. 4, arcuate, ¾-1 in.
long. Drupe black.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Niamniam-land: Gumango hills); Bahr El
Jebel.


=C. Neumayeri= _Vatke._

Shrub, 15-16 ft. high. Leaves opposite, oblong, acute, entire or crenate
at the middle, 1-1½ in. long, glabrous; flowers in axillary cymes;
corolla very short, the limb 1 in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Has Has).


=C. alatum= _Gürke._

Herb with 4-angled and narrowly winged stems. Leaves opp., sessile, up
to 1 ft. long, oblanceolate, toothed in upper third. Panicle thyrsoid,
many-flowered, terminal, 1 ft. long; cor. tube short, upper lobes
whitish-lilac, lower violet with 2 white blotches.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Tuhami’s Zariba).


=C. triflorum= _Vis._

Shrub with bluntly 4-angled branches. Leaves long-petioled, broadly-
ovate, toothed at the middle. Cymes axillary, drooping, 3-flowered;
calyx 5-angled, lobes lanceolate; cor. tube 3 times length of calyx,
lobes elliptic.

Nubia.


=C. near C. neriifolium= _Wall._

Shrub, ab. 5 ft. high, branches 4-angled, sulcate. Leaves ternate below,
alt. above, lanceolate to ovate-elliptic, larger ones sometimes
obsoletely and coarsely serrate. Fl. axillary in simple and compound
cymes, forming terminal panicles; calyx ½ in. long, accrescent and
broadly campanulate in fruit, 5-toothed; cor. white, tube 1 in. long,
slender, lobes 5, 2 upper ½ in. long, lower ⅓ in.; st. 4, 1 in long,
didynamous, exserted; style 1½ in. long, bifid; ovary 4-celled, ovules
4. Drupe black.

Mongalla Prov. (Sudd Region & Bor); Bahr El Jebel (on termite hills).


=C. ugandense= _Prain._

Shrub, 3-10 ft. Leaves opposite, elliptic to narrowly obovate, coarsely
toothed, up to 4½ in. long and 2½ in. broad, glabrous. Cymes lax, few-
flowered. Flowers whitish and blue.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


700 =Avicennia marina= _Stapf._ SHORA—Arab.

Shrub or small tree, white tomentose. Leaves opp., oblong or oblong-
lanceolate, 1½-3 in. long, coriaceous, tomentose beneath. Spikes
globose, terminal and axillary; bracts minute, broadly ovate; calyx
5-partite; cor. tube short, funnel-shaped, lobes 4-5, bright-yellow; st.
4. Fr. ovoid, 1 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.L., Littoral).

Fruit bitter but edible. The bark is used for tanning.


                               =LABIATÆ.=


701 =Ocimum basilicum= _Linn._ RIHAN—Arab; ORHAN—Hadendowa; KWARNYĀL
(Dilling)—Nuba. Basil.

Erect annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves opp., petioled, ovate, 1-2 in. long.
Fl. in whorled racemes, up to 9 in. long; bracts ovate, length of a
whorl; calyx ¼ in. long, 5-lobed, uppermost lobe orbicular decurrent,
lower deltoid, mucronate, 2 lowest longest of all; cor. white, tinged
purple, ½ in. long, tube ¼ in., limb 2-lipped, upper 4-lobed; st. 4,
didynamous, 2 upper toothed at base of filaments, anthers 1-celled;
bifid style rising from central base of 4 lobes of the ovary as in all
this family as also fr. of 4 nutlets.

Dongola Prov.; Khartoum Prov. (J. Royan); Kassala Prov.; Blue Nile
Prov.; White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan & Darfur Provinces.

It yields a strong fibre. The plant is aromatic and on distillation
yields a volatile oil which, when kept, solidifies into a crystalline
camphor. The seeds infused in water make a cooling drink; they are said
to be demulcent, stimulant, diuretic & diaphoretic.


=O. canum= _Sims._

Densely pubescent annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves ovate or lanceolate, 1-2
in. long. Fl. in whorled racemes as in all this genus, 3-6 in. long;
bracts small, ovate, deciduous; calyx ⅙ in. long, 2 lateral lobes
minute, otherwise as above; cor. white, ⅙ in. long; st. as above, much
exserted.

Cultivated. Also in Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé, Jur; Jur Ghattas).

The leaves made into paste are used to cure parasitical diseases of the
skin.


=O. suave= _Willd._

Pubescent perennial. Leaves ovate, 3-4 in. long, crenate, densely hairy
beneath. Racemes dense, panicled, up to 9 in. long; bracts ovate,
deciduous; calyx ¼ in. long; cor. ab. ¼ in. long, white, tinged purple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land: between Kero & Ngama).


=O. menthæfolium= _Hochst._ HADANIT—Hadendowa.

Perennial very like _O. canum_. Leaves oblong or oblong-lanceolate, 1-1½
in. long. Calyx ⅛ in. and cor. ¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Khor Tamanib); Kordofan Prov. (J. Kurbaj &
Obeid); Darfur Prov. (Kulme & 40 miles West of El Fasher); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


=O. citriodorum= _Vis._

Undershrub; stems pubescent. Leaves ovate-lanceolate, crenate. Racemes
lax, simple; bracts shortly petioled, ciliate; calyx hairy, upper lobe
orbicular, lateral ovate, lower lanceolate, subulate; cor. blue-violet,
longer than calyx, small; filaments of upper st. with tuft of hairs at
base.

Nubia; Khartoum Prov.


=O. Johnstonii= _Baker._

Tall, bushy, fragrant herb. Leaves ovate, deeply crenate, ab. 1½ in.
long. Calyx ⅛ in. and cor. ¼ in. long; upper filaments of st. with basal
tufts of hairs.

Khartoum, cultivated.


=O. dichotomum= _Hochst._

Erect branched annual. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, 1-1½ in. long. Racemes
long, lax; bracts small; calyx tube campanulate in fruit, ⅙ in. long;
cor. a little longer than calyx; st. filaments unappendaged at base.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.


702 =Platystoma africanum= _P. Beauv._

Erect annual, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves ovate, 1-2 in. long, crenate,
pubescent. Racemes fairly dense, 3-6 in. long, whorls 10-flowered;
pedicels deflexed in fruit; calyx lobes 2, toothed; cor. pale lilac,
minute, bilabiate, upper lip 4-toothed, lower entire; st. 4, declinate,
filaments dilated at base.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Gir & Jur).


703 =Acrocephalus Schweinfurthii= _Briquet._

Tall herb with grey appressed hairs. Leaves linear, 1-2 in. long,
narrowed at each end. Fl. in globose, corymbose heads, ⅓ in. diam.;
basal bracts ovate-lanceolate, tipped blue-purple; calyx minute; cor.
small, 2-lipped, upper lip 4-lobed; st. 4, didynamous, exserted,
filaments unappendaged.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Aweit & Agada).


=A. lilacinus= _Oliv._

Hairy perennial, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves whorled, lin.-lanceolate, 1-1½ in.
long, denticulate. Heads in dense, terminal corymbs; basal bracts ovate,
yellowish, upper orbicular, cuneate, cuspidate, greenish, ⅛ in. long;
cor. pale-lilac, nearly ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Sabbi River).


=A. Heudelotii= _Briquet._

Pubescent perennial, 1½-2 ft. high. Leaves whorled, linear, 1½-2 in.
long. Heads globose corymbose; basal bracts linear, foliaceous, upper
obovate-cuneate, pale, hairy, ⅛ in. long; cor. twice as long as calyx,
pale violet.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Agada near Jur Ghattas & Jur Aweit).


704 =Moschosma polystachyum= _Benth._

Much-branched annual; stem 4-angled, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves ovate,
crenate, pubescent. Racemes 2-4 in. long, with 6-10 flowered whorls;
calyx ⅛ in. long, upper tooth orbicular, not decurrent, lateral ovate,
lower cuspidate; cor. pale lilac, 2-lipped, lobes short.

Fung Prov. (Saoleil, Blue Nile, Jongol’s Post, etc.); White Nile Prov.
(J. Arashkol & Abba Island); Kordofan Prov. (moist places); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Shambé); Mongalla Prov. (Bor & 5° 10′ N.L.).


705 =Orthosiphon bartsioides= _Baker._

Slender perennial. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, up to 2 in. long, crenate,
pubescent, sessile. Raceme long, lax; whorls 2-flowered; calyx deflexed
in fruit, upper tooth orbicular decurrent, 4 others cuspidate, ¼ in.
long; cor. ab. ½ in. long; st. 4, not exserted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Roa River, Niamniam-land: River Mabode).


=O. pallidus= _Royle._

Branched perennial. Leaves short-petioled, small, ovate, crenate,
pubescent. Racemes terminal, whorls few-flowered; calyx ¼ in. long,
upper lobe orbicular and decurrent, lateral and lower large-awned; cor.
½ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Suakin).


=O. Schimperi= _Benth._

Branched perennial. Leaves ovate, crenate, hairy, 1-3 in. long, long
petioled. Racemes whorled; calyx ¼ in. long, upper lobe suborbicular,
decurrent, lateral small-awned, lower longer awned; cor. tube ⅓ in.
long, limb 2-lipped, lobes small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nganye); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


706 =Becium (Ocimum) Knyanum= _(Vatke) N.E. Br._

Erect pubescent perennial. Leaves subsessile, linear to oblong-
lanceolate, 1-2 in. long, crenate. Racemes long, lax, with a tuft of
linear bracts; whorls 4-6 flowered; calyx ⅓ in. long, upper lobe
orbicular, decurrent, others large-awned; cor. ⅔ in. long, 2-lipped,
upper 4-lobed; st. 4, exserted, upper filaments with basal tufts of
hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land: Gir & Jur Ghattas).


=B. obovatum= _N.E. Br._

Erect herb, 1 ft. high from woody rhizome. Leaves sessile, elliptic-
obovate, 1½ in. long, ¾ in. broad, densely gland-dotted, subentire.
Spikes broadly triangular, 1½ in. long. Bracts purplish. Calyx
pubescent.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Biri River, between Chak Chak & Deim Zubeir).


=B. (Ocimum) Schweinfurthii= _(Briquet) N.E. Br._

Tall pubescent perennial. Leaves subsessile, oblong, up to 6 in. long,
cuneate at base, crenate, scabrous above. Raceme short, dense, terminal;
bracts large obovate, cuspidate; calyx ⅙ in. long, upper tooth ovate,
slightly decurrent, others bristle-like; cor. ½ in. long; st. 4, upper
filaments toothed at base.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumango River).


707 =Hoslundia opposita= _Vahl._ SASA DIM—Rashida.

Much branched shrub. Leaves opp., oblong or obl.-lanceolate, 3-4 in.
long, dentate. Panicles terminal, lax; bracts minute; calyx small,
broadly 5-toothed, enlarged globose and red in fruit; cor. lilac, ⅙ in.
long, 2-lipped, st. 2 perfect and 2 rudimentary.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora); Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas & Nuer District); Bahr El Jebel.


708 =Plectranthus stachyoides= _Oliv._

Perennial, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves opp., subsessile, ovate or oblong, up to
3 in. long, pubescent, crenate. Infl. a dense terminal racemose panicle,
6-8 in. long; whorls many-flowered; bracts ovate, pubescent, ¼ in. long:
calyx 5-toothed, upper lobe ovate, reflexed, others deltoid, awned, ¼
in. long; cor. ½ in. long, lilac. St. 4, didynamous, free.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=P. ovatifolius= _Oliv._

Erect perennial. Leaves short-petioled, ovate, 1 in. long, pubescent.
Infl. a lax terminal racemose panicle; whorls few-flowered; calyx ⅓ in.
long, upper tooth ovate, mucronate, reflexed, decurrent, lateral teeth
small, awned, lower large, awned; cor. ½ in. long, lilac.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=P. bongensis= _Baker._

Glabrous herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves oblong, 2-3 in. long, crenate. Infl.
lax, in a cymose panicle, 6-9 in. long; calyx ⅛ in. long, upper ovate,
reflexed, lateral oblong, lower awned; cor. ⅓ in. long, lilac.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Gir in Bongo-land).


=P. cylindraceus= _Hochst._

Tall sappy herb, pubescent all over. Leaves oblong, crenate. Fl. in
dense cylindrical racemes, 3-5 in. long, 1-3 to a stem; calyx minute,
teeth subequal; cor. ⅛ in. long, white.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


709 =Coleus barbatus= _Benth._ KĀHAB, & KALIAH—Hadendowa.

Woody perennial, 2-4 ft. high. Leaves petioled, ovate or oblong, 1-4 in.
long, crenate, hairy. Panicle racemose, ½-1 ft. long; whorls many-
flowered; fruit-calyx ⅙ in. long, upper tooth suborbicular, 4 others
acute; cor. bright blue, ½ in. long, tube deflexed in middle, limb
2-lipped, lower as long as tube; filaments of 4 st. united at the base
in a tube as in all this genus.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Suakin).


=C. cf. C. igniarius= _Schwfth._

Small woody shrub. Fl. appear before the leaves; cor. purple, scented.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Ashat).


=C. latifolius= _Hochst._

Herb with tuberous root, 1 ft. high. Leaves ovate, 1-3 in. long,
crenate, pubescent. Racemes dense, 4-6 in. long; fr. calyx ⅙ in. long,
upper tooth ovate, lateral shorter, orbicular, 2 lower acute, connate to
near tip; cor. ⅓ in. long, lilac.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=C. Penzigii= _Dammann._

White-hairy perennial. Leaves ovate, up to 4 in. long, crenate; petiole
winged. Racemes panicled, whorls 8-flowered; calyx ⅙ in. long, 2 lateral
teeth smaller; cor. tube ⅓ in. long, lower lip lilac, ¼ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=C. Briquetii= _Baker._

Tall herb. Leaves petioled, oblong-lanceolate, 2-3 in. long, acuminate,
serrate. Racemes long, dense; whorls many-flowered; calyx minute in fl.,
enlarged in fruit, upper tooth ovate, decurrent, 2 lateral orbicular, 2
lowest acuminate, connate half-way up; cor. ⅓ longer.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


710 =Englerastrum Schweinfurthii= _Briquet._

Erect hairy annual. Leaves ovate, 1 in. long, crenate. Racemes axillary,
whorls 1-2 flowered; calyx ½ in. long, glandular-pubescent, teeth 5,
ovate, subequal; cor. tube 1½ in., lower lip ab. 1 in., concave, upper
small with 3 rounded lobes. St. 4, filaments united in lower half,
exserted.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Addai).


711 =Æolanthus ambustus= _Oliv._

Slender herb, 1 ft. high. Leaves sessile, ascending, linear, 1-1½ in.
long. Spikes slender, erect; bracts ⅙ in., partly hiding the flowers;
calyx minute, 2-lobed; cor. lilac, ⅓ in. long, 2-lipped; st. 4, free.

Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=Æ. virgatus= _Gürke._

Much branched annual, 1½ ft. high. Leaves as above, up to 2 in. long.
Bracts ¼ in. long, otherwise as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gurfala).


=Æ. heliotropioides= _Oliv._

Herb, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves sessile, oblong or lin.-oblong, up to 2
in. long. Spikes panicled, upper ones one-sided, 1-2 in. long; bracts
very small; calyx minute, truncate, pubescent; cor. lilac, ¼ in. long,
lower lip orbicular, concave ab. same size as upper. St. exserted.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


712 =Pycnostachys Schweinfurthii= _Briquet._

Erect branched perennial, 2 ft. high. Leaves linear, up to 4 in. long,
sessile or subsessile, serrate. Spikes dense, 1½-2 in. long; fr. calyx ⅓
in. long, teeth 5, subulate; cor. pale blue, tube deflexed, upper lip
4-toothed, lower concave, ¼ in. long; st. 4, free.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Dukuttu).


=P. Petherickii= _Baker._

Perennial, stems 4-angled. Leaves sessile, oblong-lanceolate, upper half
crenate, gland-dotted beneath. Spike dense, up to 4 in. long. Calyx tube
short, teeth ¼ in. long, subulate; cor. blue, pubescent on outside.

White Nile.


=P. niamniamensis= _Gürke._

Erect pubescent herb. Leaves sessile, oblong-lanceolate, 2-3 in. long,
serrate with scattered red glands. Spikes oblong; bracts linear, ⅓ in.
long; calyx ½ in. long, tube short, teeth subulate.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: River Hoo).


713 =Hyptis brevipes= _Poir._

Pubescent herb, 3-4 ft. high. Leaves subsessile, oblong-rhomboid,
crenate, upper ones lanceolate. Fl. axillary, peduncled, in dense
globose heads, ½ in. diam.; outer bracts lanceolate, as long as flowers;
calyx ⅛ in. long, teeth 5, subulate; cor. ⅛ in. long, lower lip
deflexed, concave; st. 4, free.

Mongalla Prov. (Lado: Yei River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=H. spicigera= _Lam._ KINDI—Bongo.

Tall pubescent annual, often found in stubble. Leaves petioled, oblong,
crenate. Panicles dense racemose oblong, end racemes 2-4 in. long,
whorls many-flowered; fr. calyx 1/5 in. long, teeth short; cor. whitish,
¼ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gir cultivated).

The seeds are brayed to a pulp by the Zandes and used as an adjunct to
stews and gravies. They are also roasted and eaten or an edible oil
extracted from them. This oil, although not suitable for soap and candle
making, might be useful for fatty varnishes in painting.


=H. pectinata= _Poir._

Herb, 4-6 ft. high. Leaves small, ovate, crenate, pubescent. Panicles
racemose; fr. calyx ⅙ in. long, villous inside, teeth small, setaceous;
cor. size of calyx.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


714 =Lavandula pubescens= _Decne._

Hairy, scented perennial; stems 4-angled. Leaves broad, bipinnatifid,
segments linear. Panicles spicate, whorls 2-flowered; bracts ovate, ⅛
in. long; calyx 13-nerved, as long as bracts, teeth small; cor. blue,
small; st. 4, free.

Darfur Prov.


=L. coronopifolia= _Poir._ SADDĀM—Hadendowa.

Fragrant perennial, up to 18 in. high. Leaves sessile, narrowly linear
with revolute edges, simple or pinnatipartite. Panicles spicate, 2-3 in.
long; bracts ovate-lanceolate; calyx ⅙ in. long, pubescent, 13-nerved,
teeth short; cor. blue, ⅓ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib, Suakin, Erkowit & 21° N.L.); Darfur Prov.
(J. Meidob 3,500 ft. & J. Marra 8,200 ft.).


715 =Mentha sylvestris= _Linn._

Strongly scented, densely pubescent herb. Leaves sessile, lanceolate,
serrate. Fl. in terminal whorled, racemose panicles 2-3 in. long; calyx
minute, 10-ribbed, 5-toothed, teeth lanceolate; cor. ⅙ in. long, lobes
4, uppermost broad and emarginate.

Darfur Prov. (Zalingei & J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.).


716 =Micromeria biflora= _Benth._ HADEMBUI—Hadendowa.

Bushy pubescent perennial with a weak smell of thyme, ½-1 ft. high.
Leaves ovate or oblong, ab. ⅓ in. long, rigid. Cymes 2-6 flowered,
subsessile, axillary; calyx ab. ⅙ in. long, 13-15 ribbed, teeth 5,
small; cor. shortly exserted, dilated at throat, 2-lipped; st. 4.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & 21° N.L.); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 8-9,500 ft.).


=M. abyssinica= _Benth._

Bushy pubescent herb, 1-2 ft. high, scented like thyme. Leaves ovate,
crenate, 1-1½ in. long. Spikes whorled, whorls many-flowered, the lowest
subtended by large leaves; calyx ¼ in. long, 13-15 ribbed, teeth small;
cor. tube ¼ in. long, limb 2-lipped, lower lip 3-lobed.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


717 =Salvia nudicaulis= _Vahl._ =var. nubica= _Baker._

Perennial with rosette-like radical leaves; stem-leaves oblong or
oblong-lanceolate, 1½-2 in. long, crenulate, densely pubescent beneath.
Panicles laxly racemed, whorls of ab. 6 flowers; calyx hairy, ¼ in.
long, 2-lipped, lower bifid; cor. ½ in. long, upper lip arched, lower
deflexed; st. 2, with 1 perfect anther cell; rudimentary st. 2.

Nubia.


=S. ægyptiaca= _Linn._ RA’AL—Arab.

Small heather-like undershr. Stems with setose reflexed hairs. Leaves
deeply crisped-undulate, strongly reticulate. Calyx lobes very acute.
Corolla ⅓ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Has Has & 21° N.L.).


718 =Nepeta biloba= _Hochst._ NABBALAM—Hadendowa.

Herb, 2-3 ft. high, pubescent. Leaves ovate, 2 in. long, crenate, the
upper sessile. Racemes long, lower whorls distant, subtended by large
leaves; bracts many, linear, ¼ in. long; calyx ¼ in., teeth 5, ribs 15;
cor. under ½ in., violet-blue, lower lip 3-lobed, central one largest;
st. 4.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Has Has).


=N. ballotæfolia= _Hochst._

Pubescent herb. Leaves ovate, 1-1½ in. long, crenate, sessile. Racemes
as above; bracts linear, large; calyx ¼ in.; cor. tube longer than
calyx, lower lip ⅛ in. long, 3-lobed, central lobe largest.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 9,200-9,500 ft.).


719 =Scutellaria Schweinfurthii= _Briquet._

Perennial, 1 ft. high. Leaves lanceolate, subsessile, slightly hairy.
Racemes long, lax, whorls 2-flowered; fr. calyx ¼ in., upper lip
orbicular, reflexed, lower shorter; cor. ⅓ in., lips ⅙ in. long, lower
deflexed. St. 4, upper pair 2-celled, lower 1-celled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba, & Mittu at Ngame).


720 =Otostegia tomentosa= _A. Rich_

Pubescent shrub. Leaves subsessile, very small, thick, oblong, crenate,
white-tomentose beneath. Fl. axillary, whorled, sessile, bracteate;
calyx-tube funnel-shaped, 10-ribbed, ⅓ in. long, lower lip orbicular,
upper small crenate; st. 4.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=O. repanda= _Benth._ BALUD & BASADEM—Hadendowa.

Pubescent shrub. Leaves petioled, ovate, 1-2 in. long, crenate. Fl.
axillary, whorled; bracts subulate; calyx ⅓ in. long, upper lip small,
ovate, lower orbicular, crenate, ⅓ in. broad; cor. white, longer than
calyx.

Red Sea Prov. (21-22° N. Lat., Has Has & Erkowit); Darfur Prov.
(Zalingei & J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.).


=O. scariosa= _Benth._

Pubescent shrub; branches 4-angled. Leaves petioled, broadly ovate, up
to 1 in. long, crenate. Fl. axillary, in distant whorls, bracts many
subulate; flower as above.

Darfur Prov.


721 =Leucas nubica= _Benth._

Pubescent herb. Leaves ovate, up to 2 in. long, crenate. Whorls many,
distant, many-flowered; bracts large, linear, ciliate; calyx tube ⅙ in.
long, ribs and teeth 8-10, teeth linear-subulate; cor. tube ⅙ in. long,
lips 2, small, lower 3-lobed; st. 4.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Katul Gombara).


=L. inflata= _Benth._

Densely white-hairy, branched perennial. Leaves subsessile,
suborbicular, crenate at tip, ½-1 in. long. Whorls numerous, 6-10
flowered, the upper approximate with reduced leaves; bracts minute;
calyx campanulate, inflated ⅙ in. long, villous, teeth deltoid; cor. ⅓
in. long, upper lip villous at tip.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N. Lat. J. Waratab, Khor Tamanib & Sinkat).


=L. martinicensis= _R. Br._

Branched annual, 2-3 ft. high; branches pubescent. Leaves thin, oblong,
crenate, hairy up to 3 in. long. Whorls dense, distant, bracts large,
subulate; calyx ⅙-¼ in. long, hairy, throat oblique, teeth unequal,
subulate; cor. small, deciduous.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib & Has Has); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat,
Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid); Darfur
Prov. (Zalingei & J. Marra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur Ghattas).


=L. neuflizeana= _Courb._

Densely hairy herb, 6-12 in. high. Leaves sessile, oblong-lanceolate, up
to 2 in. long, crenate, whorls 8-12 flowered, lower ones distant, upper
close together; calyx ¼ in. long, throat oblique, ribs and teeth 8-10;
cor. lip small.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=L. Schweinfurthii= _Gürke._

White-hairy herb. Leaves sessile, oblong, ab. 1 in. long, loosely
dentate in upper half. Whorls few-flowered, many, distant; calyx ⅓ in.
long; throat oblique, teeth 8-10, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: on Baginse hills).


=L. urticæfolia= _Benth._ UM GALŌT—Arab.

Hairy annual, 6-24 in. high. Leaves ovate, 1-2 in. long, crenate. Whorls
distant, globose, many-flowered, ¾ in. diam.; bracts large, linear,
ciliate; fr. calyx ⅓ in. long, oblique, teeth 8-10; cor. tube naked,
lips small.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, 21° N.L.); Central Sudan (Gezira).


722 =Leonitis pallida= _Benth._ KUSHU-KUSHU, FAKI BALADAWAYA (Meshra El
Zeraf), ABUTIFA & UMDAREIWA (Baggara)—Arab; KOPTUNINDEIR (Dilling) &
KANDINUWINDI (J. Ghulfan)—Nuba.

Tall, hairy herb. Leaves ovate, up to 4 in. long, crenate. Fl. in
globose heads, 2-2½ in. diam., spaced along the stem; bracts lanceolate,
spine-tipped; calyx tube ⅓ in. long, 8-10 ribbed and toothed, teeth
spine-tipped, uppermost largest; cor. pale-yellow; st. 4.

Nubia (between Korosko & Berber); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Mattama);
Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov. (Dilling & J. Ghulfan);
Darfur Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Bongo: Dukuttu).

The ashes are said to be used for tumours on the head.


=L. nepetæfolia= _R. Br._

Pubescent herb, 4-5 ft. high. Leaves ovate, up to 4 in. long, crenate.
Fl. arranged as above; bracts large, linear, stiff; calyx ¼ in. long,
larger in fruit, upper tooth largest, mucronate; cor. deep yellow, tube
½ in. and upper lip ½ in. long, the lower 3-lobed, deflexed.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=L. velutina= _Fenzl._ KUSHU-KUSHU—Arab.

Tall, finely hairy perennial. Leaves ovate, crenate, very hairy beneath.
Heads (whorls) very dense, 3 in. diam.; bracts small, linear; calyx
hairy, teeth deltoid, upper largest; cor. bright yellow, 1 in. long,
upper lip up to ½ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Roseires); Æthiopia; Kordofan Prov. (Obeid).


723 =Tinnea æthiopica= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Shrub, 3-5 ft. high. Leaves subsessile, oblong, up to 2 in. long. Whorls
laxly disposed, 2-flowered; bracts oblong, green, as long as the
flowers; calyx ⅓ in. enlarging to 1 in., bladder-shaped; cor. maroon,
2-lipped, upper short, orbicular, lower deflexed, 3-lobed, ⅙ in. long;
st. 4; seeds winged.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Bongo: Mvolo, Dar Fertit below Pongo River &
Biselli, Niamniam-land).


724 =Teucrium nummularifolium= _Baker._ EIGAB—Hadendowa.

Woolly herb with obovate coarsely crenate leaves about ⅓ in. long. Calyx
woolly pilose, the lobes more or less subulate. Corolla purple.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


725 =Ajuga bracteosa= _Wall._

Hairy perennial. Leaves oblanceolate, coarsely dentate, sessile. Whorls
axillary 2- or many-flowered; calyx ⅙ in. long, 10-ribbed, teeth 5,
equal; cor. blue, ⅓ in. long, upper lip short, lower longer, 3-lobed,
deflexed; st. 4, slightly exserted.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


                            =MONOCOTYLEDONS=


                             =ALISMATACEÆ.=


726 =Alisma Plantago= _Linn._

Perennial marsh herb. Leaves radical, long petioled, lanceolate, ovate
or cordate, 3-7 nerved, 2-8 in. long. Fl. in verticillate panicles;
scapes solitary or many, 1-2 ft. high; fl. ab. 8 to each verticil. Sep.
3, persistent; pet. 3, white; sta. 6; carpels 15-20, compressed, forming
a ring round the axis of the fl., verrucose; style aristate.

Kordofan Prov. (Rahad).


727 =Caldenia reniformis= _Makino._

Marsh herb. Leaves broadly ovate, cordate, 1-4 in. long, 7-15 nerved,
marked with pellucid lines; pet. up to 20 in. long. Scape 20-40 in.
high, panicled above; fl. 3 in each verticil. Sep. broad ovate, after
flowering erect and sheathing the fruit; pet. white; carpels 9-12
scarcely compressed, smooth; style aristate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


728 =Limnophyton obtusifolium= _Miq._

Perennial marsh herb. Leaves radical; pet. long; blade sagittate; sinus
broad; terminal lobe 2-7 in. long, nerves 7-11, radiating from apex of
pet. and somewhat converging. Scapes 1 or more; fl. in verticils
arranged in a panicle, 4-15 to a whorl, upper male, the lower
hermaphrodite mixed with a few male. Sep. 3, reflexed after flowering;
pet. 3, white; sta. 6, those of the male fl. larger; carpels 15-20 in
2-4 whorls; achenes obovoid in a globose head.

Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar); White Nile Prov. (Goz Abu Guma & J. Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov. (Birkat Rahad); Darfur Prov. (Zalingei 3,100 ft.);
Mongalla Prov. (Abu Kuka to Gondokoro).


729 =Lophotocarpus guyanensis= _Durand_ & _Schinz._

Marsh herb. Leaves with milky juice, radical, floating, ovate-cordate, 2
in. long; pet. varying in length with depth of water. Scape bearing few-
flowered whorls near the apex, lower hermaphr., upper hermaphr. and
male. Sep. 3, distinct, sheathing in fr.; pet. 3, cuneate, fugacious;
sta. 6-10 in male fl., 9-12 in others, anthers elongate, sagittate;
carpels numerous; achenes compressed laterally, dense on a convex
receptacle.

Kordofan Prov. (Taiara).


730 =Echinodorus humilis= _Buchen._

Small marsh herb with a tuft of brown roots. Leaves radical; pet.
slender, usually 1-1½ in. long; blade ovate or ovate-lanc., ab. 1 in.
long, acute at both ends. Scapes shorter than leaves, 1-flowered. Sep.
3, persistent; pet. 3, white; sta. 6-9; achenes much compressed, many in
a subglobose or ovoid head.

White Nile Prov. (banks of the River: Tawila, Kosti (Khors), Abba Island
& near J. Nyemati).


731 =Burnatia enneandra= _Micheli._

Marsh herb. Leaves radical; pet. 5-16 in. long; blade lin. to lanc., 5-8
in. long. Scape longer than leaves; infl. diœcious; panicles
verticillately branched; male pan. 12-16 in. long, fem. 8-10. Male fl.:
sep. 3; pet. 3, small: sta. 9; rudimentary carpels 12. Fem. fl.: sep. 3;
pet. 0; sta. 0, or 1-2 imperfect; carpels ab. 12 crowded on small
receptacle, compressed.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post), White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


732 =Wisneria Schweinfurthii= _Hook. f._

Marsh herb. Leaves radical; pet. sheathing at base, 9 in. long; blade
oblong or oblanc., up to 6 in. long. Scape as long as leaves, bracts
united into truncate membranous campanulate sheaths; male fl. in upper
part of scape, fem. below. Male fl.: sep. 3; sta. 3; fem. fl.: sep. 3;
carpels 3-6 ovoid. Pet. 0.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gir; Jur: Jur Ghattas).


                              =BUTOMACEÆ.=


733 =Butomopsis lanceolata= _Kunth._

Marsh herb with milky juice. Leaves radical; pet. up to 10 in.; blade
ovate, tapering into pet., up to 4 in. long. Scape longer than leaves,
in umbellate ab. 6-flowered cyme; pedicels up to 4 in. long in fruit.
Fl. hermaphr.; sep. 3; pet. 3, white, fugacious; sta. 9 or fewer;
carpels usually six, follicled in fr.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol & Um Kinein).


                           =APONOGETONACEÆ.=


734 =Aponogeton subconjugatus= _Schumacher_ & _Thonn._

Submerged water plant. Leaves long-stalked, elongate-oblong, often
speckled brown, blade 5-12 in. long. Scape bearing a bifid spike which
is ab. 1½ in. long; young flowers enclosed in a glove-finger-like
sheath, separating from the base. Fl. hermaphr.; sep. 1-3; sta. 6;
carpels 3-5, usually 4.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=A. vallisnerioides= _Baker._

Submerged plant, densely tufted. Leaves sessile, strap-shaped, 3-4 in.
long. Spikes simple, dense flowered, sheathed as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba & Jur Ghattas; Bongo:
Gir & Dumuku).


                           =POTAMOGETONACEÆ.=


735 =Potamogeton Schweinfurthii= _Arth. Bennett._

Submerged plant; stems ab. 2 ft. long, branched. Lower leaves
lin.-lanc., acute, 3-4 in. long, 5-nerved; middle leaves lanc.,
11-nerved, ab. 3 in. long; upper leaves floating, lanceolate to
lanc.-ovate, 10-13 nerved, 2-3 in. long; pet. 2-3½ in. long; stip. 1-2
in. long. Ped. axillary, 4-6 in. long, base enclosed in a membranous
spathe; spike 1-2 in. long, dense. Per. segm. 4, green; anthers 4,
sessile; carpels 4, 1-celled; fr. sharply 3-keeled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main river: Nuer villages, mouth of Bahr El Arab).


=P. javanicus= _Hassk._

Submerged plant; stems slender, branched. Submerged leaves narrow-lin.,
2-3 in. long; floating leaves lanceolate, ½ in. or more, long petioled;
lower stip. connate, upper free. Ped. axillary; spikes ¼-¾ in. long. Fr.
2-keeled.

White Nile Prov. (Jebelein, Goz Abu Gum’a); Bahr El Jebel (Sudd); Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Mouth of Bahr El Arab; Niamniam-land: River Rei,
Gumango Hill).


=P. crispus= _Linn._

Stem compressed, slender, branched. Leaves all one shape, semi-
amplexicaul, obl. or obl.-strap-shaped, undulate, serrulate; stip.
small. Ped. in forks of the stem, stoutish; spike large lax-flowered.
Fr. obliquely ovoid with long curved beak.

Nubia; Khartoum Prov. (in White Nile); Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar);
Kordofan Prov.


=P. pusillus= _Linn._

Stem slender, branched. Leaves all similar, semi-amplexicaul, narrow-
lin., acumin. or acute; stip. small, acute. Ped. slender; spike few-
flowered, ¼-½ in. long. Fr. semi-oval or obovoid, bluntly 3-keeled.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: below Niurnya 5,500 ft.).


=P. lucens= _Linn._

Stem stout, branched. Leaves all submerged, the lower lin.-lanc. to
lanc., the lowest sessile, petioled above, the pet. gradually
lengthening to ab. 1 in.; upper leaves lanc. to ovate; stip. long,
beaked or winged. Ped. 2-9 in. long, stout; spikes ab. 2 in. long,
dense. Fr. slightly acumin., slightly convex on ventral and semicircular
on dorsal margin.

Bahr El Jebel (2° N.L.).


                              =NAIADACEÆ.=


736 =Naias graminea= _Del._

Submerged plant; stems up to 2 ft. long, slender, rooting at lower
nodes. Leaves sometimes in clusters at the nodes, linear, closely
serrate and with an auricled serrate sheath. Infl. monœcious, axillary,
male and fem. side by side or fem. only, all without spathes. Male fl.
solitary; per. ending above anther in ear-like lobes; anther 1,
subsessile; fem. fl. 1-4, consisting of a single ovary, sessile, with 2
stigmas. Fr. lin.-obl.

White Nile Prov. (Um Kinein near J. Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba).


=N. Schweinfurthii= _Magnus._

Small water plant with spreading branches. Leaves thin, slender, with
ab. 12 marginal teeth, ending in a brown spine; sheaths with short,
obtuse auricles. Infl. monœcious; male spathe oblong; anther 1-celled.
Fem. spathe oval-oblong, produced into a neck round the long style.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=N. horrida= _A. Br._

Water plant; stems long, short branched; inter-nodes short. Leaves
falcate with spinulose teeth; sheaths rounded, toothed; male flower only
with spathe; anther 4-celled.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); White Nile Prov. (Goz Abu Gum’a); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (mouth of Jur River, etc.).


737 =Cymodocea rotundata= _Aschers._ & _Schweinfth._

Submerged marine plant; rhizome thick, creeping; branches short,
terminated by narrow-linear leaves with stipular sheaths, denticulate
upwards, 9-13 nerved. Infl. monœcious, axillary. Male fl. long
peduncled, longer than leaves; per. 0; anthers 2, connate, stipitate.
Fem. fl. carpels 2, subovoid, strongly keeled, acute, dentate.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & Dongonab).


=C. serrulata= _Aschers._ & _Magnus._

Leaves almost straight, 4-6 in. long and up to ⅓ in. broad; tip entire
or denticulate; nerves ab. 7 pairs; sheaths as broad as the blade.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & Dongonab).


=C. ciliata= _Ehrenb._

Stem 3-12 in. long, woody, branched, marked with annular scars. Leaves
lin.-falcate, 3-6 in. long, ½-⅔ in. broad, tip rounded, ciliate-
serrulate.

Red Sea Prov. (Abu Hamir near Dongonab).


=C. isoëtifolia= _Aschers._

Stem short, filiform. Leaves terete, grooved, 3-5 in. long, slender;
tip. 3-toothed. Fl. in dichotomous cymes.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin northwards).


=C. sp.=

Leaves broad-linear; stipular sheaths transparent, chartaceous.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab).


                              =TYPHACEÆ.=


738 =Typha angustata= _Bory_ & _Chaub._ BURDI & DIS—Arab.

Marsh or aquatic herb. Leaves alt., strap-shaped, ⅙-½ in. broad.
Flowering stem erect, terminated by a dense, felt-like cylindrical
spike, interrupted at or below the middle by a naked space, ¼-1 in.
long, the upper spike being male and the lower female. Male fl.: sta. 3;
filam. connate; fem. fl. mingled with bracteoles, clavate or spathulate
much longer than surrounding hairs.

Nubia; Blue Nile, White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


=T. angustifolia= _Linn._

Marsh herb, 5-6 ft. high. Leaves linear, ⅓-⅓ in. broad. Male portion of
spike longer than and ¼-1½ in. distant from fem. portion of spike. Male
fl. with forked, acute, or entire spathulate bracteoles. Fem. fl. with
orbicular-spathulate, obovate or obcordate bracteoles about as long as
the surrounding hairs.

Red Sea Prov. (24 miles West of Suakin).

The fibrous leaves are used for matting, ropes, baskets and also for
paper-making.


=T. australis= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Leaves linear or strap-shaped, ¼-½ in. broad. Male and fem. portions of
spike subequal, contiguous to 1 in. distant. Male bracteoles variously
shaped, entire or 2-3 forked. Fem. bracteoles as long as, or slightly
longer than hairs and lanceolate-spathulate, sometimes fusiform-clavate,
acute or acuminate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


                               =ARACEÆ.=


739 =Pistia Stratiotes= _Linn._ EL TŪBBUR (Kordn.)—Arab; KOF—Nuer;
PANGBADUPER—Zande. The Water-Lettuce.

Gregarious, floating, stemless, monœcious herb, with tufted root-fibres.
Leaves sessile in a rosette forming a cup; nerves radiating from base.
Spathe small with spadix adnate to back of its short tube. Male infl. a
whorl of 2-8 connate anthers near top of spadix. Fem. fl. of a single
ovary, apparently arising from back of the spathe.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post); White Nile & affluents.

A decoction or infusion of this plant is considered as cooling and
demulcent. The leaves are made into poultices for piles. The root is
laxative and emollient. The ashes are applied to ring-worm of the scalp.
The plant is eaten in time of famine.


740 =Sauromatum nubicum= _Schott._

Herb with depressed globose rootstock; flowers and leaf not appearing
together. Leaf solitary, pedatisect: pet. 12-18 in. long, glabrous;
segments of blade 7, broadly lanc., acumin., middle segm. longest, ab. 9
in.; veins subparallel uniting into an intramarginal vein. Ped. 2-6 in.
long; spathe tube ab. 2 in. long, blackish-purple within, limb 8-10 in.
long, spotted; spadix 8-9 in. long, male and fem. spikes ab. 1½ in.
apart; neuter organs placed just above fem. spike; terminal appendix of
spadix 7-8 in. long, purple-brown.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


741 =Stylochiton near S. gabonicus= _N.E. Br._

Herb with 1 oval, cordate leaf; flowers not seen.

Mongalla Prov. (Maleik).


=S. lancifolius= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Herb; leaves appearing before the flowers, elliptic-oblong or lanc., 3-4
in. long, rounded at base; pet. 2½-4 in. long, appearing out of the
ground. Ped. ½-¾ in. long; spathe ab. 2 in. long, tube underground;
spadix 1½ in. long. Fem. fl. 5 in a single ring, furnished with an
urceolate minute per.; male fl. distant on spadix from fem. fl.;
appendix 0.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: River Dimbo, Abu Gurun’s Zariba, River Jur,
Jur Ghattas & Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba; Bongo: Lessi River; Niamniam-land:
Makporru Hill).


742 =Amorphophallus Schweinfurthii= _N.E. Br._ GANDAH (White Nile)—Arab.

Herb with 1 long-stalked leaf divided into 3 main segments which are
again much subdivided, of a diam. up to 2 ft., not appearing with
flowers. Ped. 4-6 in. long; spathe dark purple; tube 2 in. long, pale in
the throat; limb 4 in. long with a pointed, curved hood. Spadix shorter
than spathe with a 2 in. long purple cylindric appendix; male and fem.
fl. in denser rings covering 2 in. of spadix; per. 0.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kaka); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas;
Niamniam-land: Makporru Hill); Bahr El Jebel.

It is said to be eaten as a pot-herb when young.


=A. cf. A. Schweinfurthii= _N.E. Br._

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=A. maculatus= _N.E. Br._

Tall herb with 1 palmati-tripartite leaf, with numerous subdivisions, 2½
ft. in diam.; pet. 2½ in. long, spotted olive green; ped. not produced
with the leaf, 2 ft. long, spotted; spathe convolute below; tube 5 in.
long, spotted grey, hairy inside; limb 8 in. long, ovate, red-veined.
Spadix with fem. fl covering 2 in., male fl. 1 in.; appendix 16 in.
long, cylindric, violet.

Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé).


=A. sp.=

Much like above but leaf segments much narrower. Fl. not seen.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé); Mongalla Prov. (Kenissa).


743 =Anchomanes dubius= _Schott._

Herb with solitary pinnati-tripartite, much divided leaf, 2-3 ft. diam.,
appearing after the flowers, armed on pet. and nerves with prickles;
pet. 3-5 ft. long, white spotted. Ped. up to ab. 3 ft. long, prickly,
with 1 in. white spots; spathe 6-12 in. long, boat-shaped, convolute at
base, pale purple. Spadix sessile, 4-8 in. long, without appendix; fem.
part 1 in. long, purple, remainder male. Per. 0.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Geneina & Jur Ghattas).


744 =Colocasia Antiquorum= _Schott._ KOLOKASS—Arab; MANZI—Zande.

Tuberous rooted herb, with large stoutly petioled, peltate, ovate-
cordate, sagittate leaves. Originally introduced from Asia.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).

Cultivated for its tuber, but all parts are utilised after being well
boiled to separate the acrid matter common to most aroids.


745 =Culcasia scandens= _P. Beauv._

Slender climber. Leaves lanc. to elliptic, 3-7 in. long, gland-dotted;
pet. 1-3 in. long, sheathing. Ped. 1-4 at ends of branches, up to 3 in.
long; spathe ab. 1½ in. long, convolute, hooded. Spadix ab. 2 in. long;
fem. part ½ in. long, male 1-1¼ in.; appendix 0; per. 0.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: River Mokloio near Dukuttu; Jur: Geneina &
Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Lado: Doka’s).


                           =HYDROCHARITACEÆ.=


746 =Hydrilla verticillata= _Royle._ =var. brevifolia= _Casp._

Diœcious aquatic herb; stems elongate, branched. Leaves in verticils of
4 ovate or ovate-oblong, dentate, ab. ¼ in. long; lower leaves much
shorter than internodes. Male spathe 1-flowered, axillary, solitary;
perianth double of 3 segments each, outer ovate, inner linear; sta. 3.
Fem. spathe tubular 2-dentate; per. segments 6, narrower than male;
ovary exserted beyond the spathe, long-beaked; styles 3.

Bahr El Jebel (2° N.L.).


747 =Lagarosiphon Schweinfurthii= _Casp._

Aquatic herb. Leaves alt., lin.-lanceolate, ½ in. long, minutely
toothed. Male spathes many-flowered; per. 2-seriate; sta. 3; staminodes
often 2-3. Fem. spathe narrowly oblong, 1-flowered, with 1-3 teeth on
either side; styles 3.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur & Bongo lands).


=L. cordofanus= _Casp._

Leaves scattered, ½-1 in. long, linear. Male spathe sub-globose, 2-fid,
6-8 flowered. Fem. spathe axillary tubular, 2-fid.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


748 =Vallisneria spiralis= _Linn._

Submerged aquatic herb with very short stem and strap-shaped leaves,
4-18 in. long, minutely-toothed. Male spathes axillary on 1-2 in. long
stalks, many-flowered; fl. trimerous, detaching themselves when fertile
(as also in foregoing genera) and floating to the surface to fertilise
the fem. fl. Fem. spathe tubular on long stalk rising to the surface,
but withdrawing itself into the mud by spiral contraction after
fertilization; stigma 3-lobed, hairy above.

White Nile Prov. (12° 10′ L.N. & Goz Abu Gum’a); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(main River); Bahr El Jebel.


=V. æthiopica= _Fenzl._

Much like above, but leaves under 3 in. long.

White Nile Prov. (14° 30′ L.N. & J. Nyemati); Fung Prov.


749 =Ottelia alismoides= _Pers._

Aquatic herb with very short stem. Leaves with long 3-angled pet.,
broadly cordate, 4-6 in. wide, 7-11 nerved Fl. hermaphr., solitary; ped.
6-12 in. long, at length spirally contracted; spathe 3-6 toothed and
winged, adnate to ovary; outer per. segm. 3, oblong, ½ in. long, inner
segm. 3 petaloid, white, 1 in. long; sta. 6-10; styles 6, bifid; ovary
6-celled.

White Nile Prov. (Tawila); Kordofan Prov.


=O. lancifolia= _A. Rich._

Leaves radical, lanceolate, tapering into the pet., which is
subamplexicaul at the base. Spathe bifid; inner per. lobes yellow.

White Nile Prov. (Tawila); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, Middle Gindi basin,
4,900 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.

The seeds are pounded into meal by Nuers, and eaten.


=O. ulvæfolia= _Buch._

Leaves attenuate at both ends, 7-nerved, 1½ in. broad. Spathe winged,
obtusely 6-angled; inner per. lobes bright yellow, 1 in. long.

White Nile Prov. (Salati); Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


=O. near O. ulvæfolia= _Buch._

Submerged leaves narrowly linear-oblanceolate, up to 1 ft. long. Spathes
1¾ in. long, smooth. Flowers yellow.

White Nile Prov. (Tawila).


750 =Boottia scabra= _Benth._ & _Hook. f._

Leaves submerged, thin, oblanceolate, 1½-2 ft. long, 2½ in. wide;
petiole 1 ft. long, expanded at the base into an amplexicaul base.
Spathe 3½ in. long, unisexual, rugose, toothed. Petals yellow or cream
coloured.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


=B. abyssinica= _Ridl._

As above, but spathe smooth, and only 2 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas & Main River); Mongalla Prov. (Kagulu
Khor, Yei River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


751 =Thalassia Hemprichii= _Ehrb._

Submerged marine plant. Leaves fascicled at intervals, linear, 6 in.
long. Infl. diœcious; male spathes solitary, 2-leaved; per. 3-lobed;
sta. 6. Fem. fl. at length stalked; ovary long-beaked. Fruit globose.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin & Arakea).


752 =Halophila ovata= _Gaud._

Submerged marine herb, just above low-water mark. Leaves 2 from each
node, ovate, 1 in. long; pet. 1 in. long. Male fl. solitary; per.
3-lobed; sta. 3. Fem. fl. sessile in the spathe; per. segm. 3, minute;
styles 3; ovary beaked.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin).


=H. stipulacea= _Aschers._

Leaves linear, 2 in. long; pet. ¼ in. Much as above.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab).


                              =LEMNACEÆ.=


753 =Lemna polyrhiza= _Linn._

Duckweed, the floating front bearing several roots.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El Rek).

It has been suggested that this plant might be utilised in anti-mosquito
work, as pools covered with it never contain larvae of the Culicidae.


=L. paucicostata= _Hegelmeier._

The floating frond nearly ⅓ in. long, bearing 1 root.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (J. Nyemati); Kordofan
Prov. (Fula Habsha); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Abwo stream 8,200 ft.);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba); Mouth of Bahr El
Jebel.


=L. æquinoctialis= _Welw._

Floating frond minute with a keel above, bearing 1 root.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Makporru Hill & Nganye near the
River Ibba).


754 =Wolffia Delilii= _Schleid._

Duckweed; frond minute, rootless.

Kordofan Prov. (Bara); Darfur Prov. (Suruj District: J. Barkin).


                              =LILIACEÆ.=


755 =Smilax kraussiana= _Meisn._

Climbing shrub with prickly stem. Leaves oblong or orbicular, 5-6 in.
long with 3 basal nerves and 2 stipular tendrils from base of petiole.
Infl. diœcious in short-peduncled, many-flowered axillary umbels. Per.
segm. 6; male fl.: sta. 6; filam. short; fem. fl.: staminodes 6 or
fewer; ovary 3-celled, superior as in all this Order. Berry size of a
pea.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: River Buddu); Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River).


756 =Asparagus Pauli-Guilelmi= _Solms._ DALADE & DILEH—Golo.

Erect undershr., 4-5 ft. high. Leaves minute, scale-like, with a hooked
prickle at the bases, bearing in their axils 1-5 narrow, linear pointed
leaf-like branchlets (cladodes), ¼ in. long. Fl. axillary solitary or
paired; per. white, minute, 6-partite; sta. 6; style short, stigmas 3;
berry size of a pea.

Nubia; Kordofan Prov. (Agari); Upper White Nile Prov. (Renk); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Jur River & Wau, Dinka country, Ghabat
El Arab, Rek District); Bahr El Jebel.


=A. Schweinfurthii= _Baker._

Prickly shrub. Cladodes in fascicles of 3-6, ¾-1¼ in. long. Fl. in
axillary pairs.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: on the banks of the River Gendua).


=A. asiaticus= _Linn._

Prickly climbing shrub. Cladodes 6-15 in a cluster, ½ in. long, stout.
Fl. several in axillary clusters.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.).


=A. africanus= _Lam._ DAHUAB—Hadendowa; UM MUSHBUT & MESHEIT (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Arab; GAGALI—Bari; BUT—Dinka; TIANKA—Burun.

Tall, prickly shrub. Cladodes densely fascicled, stout, ½-1 in. long.
Fl. umbellate from sides and tips of branchlets.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.
(Mulbeis); Darfur Prov. (J. Murra: Niurnya 6,500 ft.); Upper White Nile
Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf to mouth of Sobat River); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Meshra El Rek, Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel.


=A. racemosus= _Willd._ DAYOK (Fung) & BEKHEISET—Arab; CHII—Golo;
BARAKURI—Zande.

Rambling and scandent, prickly undershr. Cladodes 2-6 in a cluster, ½-¾
in. long. Racemes solitary or fascicled, 1-2 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Port Sudan, Suakin: 19° 30′ N.L.); Fung Prov. Sherif;
Kordofan Prov.; Sobat River; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.; Bahr El Jebel.

The fruit is eaten by the Golos. The root is used as a demulcent,
diuretic, anti-dysenteric, etc., also as a demulcent in veterinary
medicine.


757 =Sanseviera Ehrenbergii= _Schweinfth._ TUMBAT—Hadendowa.

Perennial, somewhat aloe-like herb. Leaves 12-15 distichous, basal,
thick, striated, up to 5-6 ft. long. Infl. a panicle, 5-6 ft. long, with
peduncle; per. tubular with 6 linear lobes, white tinged with red, ½-¾
in. long, lobes longer than tube; sta. 6, as long as the lobes, anthers
versatile; style filiform.

Nubia (between Atbara & the Red Sea); Red Sea Prov. (Khor Ashat & Wadi
Qossir near Suakin).


=S. nilotica= _Baker._

Leaves 3 ft. long, flat, mottled, 1½ in. broad. Raceme lax, bearing
clusters of 3-9 white, tinged with green, flowers; per. ¾-1 in. long,
lobes longer than tube.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu: Mvolo).


=S. abyssinica= _N.E. Brown._ BASSAL EL WADI (Kassala), ZA’AF EL FIL,
Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf), UM KUSM (Kordofan), KHAZAN
(Baggara)—Arab; RRUK (J. Daier), GILLIA (J. El Amira), NALIAK (J.
Eliri)—Nuba; TOI or TOIRO—Jur; TAR—Dinka (Bahr El Ghazal);
BARANGA—Zande.

Leaves 2 ft. long or more, lanceolate, acute, rugose. Raceme up to 2½
ft. long; clusters 4-5 flowered. Flowers not described.

Fung Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.; Nuba Mts. Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Zeriba Agad, Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel.

Used as a source of fibre, in Bongo-land the women make kilts of the
fibre which resemble horse tails.


758 =Aloe Schweinfurthii= _Baker._

Fleshy plant. Leaves rosulate, ensiform, 18 in. long, 2 in. broad at
base, margined with deltoid spines. Peduncle stout, compressed,
branched, 2 ft. long, bearing racemes 6-9 in. long; per. pale-red, up to
1 in. long; tube short; segm. 6; sta. 6. Fr. oblong, 3-angled, 3-valved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=A. commutata= _Todaro._

Acaulescent. Leaves rosulate, oblong, lanceolate, 10-12 in. long,
spotted white; marginal teeth large. Ped. branched, 2-3 ft. long;
racemes 3-6 in. long; per. bright-red, 1½ in. long, constricted above
the ovary.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 6,000 ft.).


=A. abyssinica= _Lam._ KALANDO—Hadendowa.

Stem short. Leaves rosulate ensiform, 2 ft. long, spotted when young;
marginal teeth large. Ped. branched, 2 ft. long; racemes dense, 3-4 in.
long; per. yellow, 1 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat, Wadi Sarrawib, Erkowit, J. Sihaba).


=A. crassipes= _Baker._

Leaves ensiform, 1 ft. long and under 1 in. broad; teeth large, rather
hooked. Ped. stout, 18 in. long; raceme 6 in. long with 2 short branches
at base; per. 1¼ in. long, constricted above the ovary.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber at Kishi).


=A. sp.= NARURA (J. Eliri)—Nuba.

Leaves 1 ft. long, gradually tapered upwards, repand-dentate, about 2
in. broad near the base. Fruiting panicle about 1 ft. long. Fruits
ellipsoid, 1 in. long.

Nuba Mts. Prov, (J. Eliri to El Amira).


759 =Dracæna Ombet= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._ BATT—Hadendowa.

Many times branched, palm-like tree, 8 ft. or over, bearing dense
clusters of ensiform leaves, 2 ft. long at ends of branches. Infl.
panicled, 1 ft. or more long; fl. white, ¼ in. long; per. segm. 6; sta.
6; fr. a 3-celled berry.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, Khor Ashat, Anguab mountain, west of
Suakin).


=D. elliptica= _Thunb._ & _Dalm._

Shrub with much-branched, slender woody stems. Leaves oblong, 5-6 in.
long; pet. short, channelled. Infl. panicled; per. whitish, ½ in. long;
segm. 6; sta. 6; berry 3-lobed, 3-seeded.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River: Kagiko).


760 =Asphodelus fistulosus= _Linn._ =var. tenuifolius= _Baker._

Herb with rosette of radical, hollow, pointed leaves, 6-9 in. long. Ped.
shorter than leaves; infl. panicled; racemes lax, pedicels jointed at
middle; per. white, ⅓ in. long; segm. 6, keeled with brown, spreading
from a short tube; sta. 6; anthers versatile; fr. globose, ⅛ in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.); Berber Prov. (Abu Hashim).

The seeds are officinal and are said to be diuretic.


761 =Bulbine asphodeloides= _Roem._ & _Schult._

Tuberous acaulescent herb. Leaves 10-20 in dense basal rosette, 6-18 in.
long. Ped. shorter than leaves; raceme 3-6 in. long; pedicels solitary,
jointed at top; per. bright yellow, ⅓ in. long, segm. 6, divided to
base; sta. 6; filam. densely bearded; anthers versatile; caps. 3-angled,
⅓ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Abu Gurun’s
Zariba).


762 =Eriospermum abyssinicum= _Baker._

Tuberous herb. Leaf solitary, lanceolate, 5-6 in. long, appearing after
flowers. Ped. wiry, 3-6 in. long; racemes lax, 6-8 in. long; pedicels
jointed at apex; per. segm. 6, separate, white, keeled brown, ¼ in.
long; sta. 6, unequal, shorter than per.; caps. ¼ in. long with 3
obovate, reflexing valves.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: banks of the River Gendua); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas & Zariba Kutshok Ali); Mongalla Prov. (Lado
District: Doka’s).


763 =Acrospira sp.?=

Anthers basi-fixed, twisting up spirally.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.).


764 =Anthericum monophyllum= _Baker._

Herb with tuber crowned with bristles; stem slender, angled, ½ in. long.
Leaf solitary, lanceolate, 6-9 in. long, with a clasping base from the
middle, enclosed by a sheath. Raceme simple 1-3 in. long; pedicels
solitary, ¼ in. long, jointed at the middle; per. ½ in. long, white;
segm. 6, free, as all in this genus, with a brown, 3-nerved keel; sta.
6; anthers basifixed, as all in the genus, as long as filam.; caps.
3-angled, shallowly lobed, also as others in this genus; seeds angular.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=A. triphyllum= _Baker._

Rootstock tuberous; fibres wiry. Leaves ab. 3, with long sheathing base
and lanceolate blade, 4-6 in. long and ab. ½ in. broad, with raised
veins and thickened margins. Ped. slender, pubescent, grooved, 6-8 in.
long; raceme 3-4 in. long; pedicels short, articulated, lower geminate;
bracts lanceolate, up to ¾ in. long. Per. ¼ in. long; segm. separate,
white with 3 brown ribs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: by the River Jur).


=A. cf. A. triphyllum= _Baker._

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=A. superpositum= _Baker._

Rootstock and root-leaves not known. Ped. 24-30 in. long, bearing 3-4
sessile, oblong leaves 3-6 in. long. Racemes 1-3, lax, 2-3 in. long;
pedicels short, articulated at middle, lower 3-4-nate; per. ⅙ in. long;
segm. linear, white, with a green keel; sta. nearly as long as per.,
anthers small; caps. ⅙ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: River Ibba).


=A. triflorum= _Ait._ BERĪD (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Rootstock fibrous, not tuberous; neck crowned by a dense ring of
bristles. Leaves linear, 1 ft. or more long. Ped. 12-18 in. long,
angled; raceme dense, 3-6 in. long; pedicels 1-4-nate, jointed in
middle; per. ab. ½ in. long; segm. lanceolate, 5-7 nerved, white with
red-brown keel; sta. ¼ in. long; filam. scabrous. Caps. oblong.

Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Bongo: Lessi River); Mongalla Prov. (Bor &
Mongalla).

Said to be poisonous to cattle.


=A. near A. usseramense= _Baker._

Leaves several, basal, ensiform. Ped. long, flattened; pedicels short,
articulated at middle, lower geminate; racemes panicled; per. greenish-
white, ¼ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


765 =Chlorophytum macrophyllum= _Aschers._

Herb, not tuberous; root fibres long. Leaves 4-5 to a stem; blade
membranous, lanceolate, 12-18 in. long, narrowed at both ends; pet. 6-12
in. long, channelled. Ped. 6-12 in. long; raceme simple or branched at
base, 6-8 in. long; pedicels articulated, ab. ⅓ in. long, the lower
fascicled; lower bracts ab. 1 in. long. Per. white, ⅓ in. long, segm. 6,
free, with a 3-5 nerved brown keel; sta. 6, shorter than per., filam.
and anthers ⅛ in. long resp.; caps. ⅓ in. long and as others in this
genus deeply 3-lobed and seeds flat.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: banks of the River Gendua); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=C. blepharophyllum= _Schweinfth._

Root crowned with dense bristles. Leaves ab. 4 sheathing base of stem,
lowest small, others oblong-lanceolate, 4-8 in. long. Ped. slender,
shorter than leaves; rac. dense, 2-3 in. long, simple or forked at base;
pedicels short, articulated, lowest 2-3-nate. Per. dark-green, ⅓ in.
long; segm. linear with 5-nerved keel. Caps. deeply emarginate, ⅓ in.
long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=C. pusillum= _Schweinfth._

Tuberous herb. Leaves ab. 4, basal, oblong, 4-5 in. long, sessile,
crisped at margin. Rac. dense, simple, 1-2 in. long, sessile in centre
of rosette of leaves; pedicels short, articulated, clustered. Per. ⅙ in.
long, white; segm. with a greenish-brown keel. Caps. globose, ¼ in.
diam.


=C. Schweinfurthii= _Baker._

Leaves 5-6 to a stem, oblong-lanceolate, not distinctly petiolate, 12-15
in. long, 2 in. broad. Ped. 2-3 in. long; rac. 2-3 in. long, dense,
simple or branched at base; pedicels short, articulated at middle, lower
2-3-nate. Per. ¼ in. long, greenish. Caps. ⅙ in. long, ¼ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. gallabatense= _Schweinfth._

Rootstock horizontal. Leaves 6-8 to a stem, thin, lanceolate, narrowly
clasping, 12-18 in. long. Ped. slender, 1 ft. long; rac. many,
ascending, the end one 6-9 in. long; pedic. short, articulated at
middle, lower 2-3-nate. Per. dull greenish-white, ⅙ in. long. Caps. ¼
in. diam.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas).


=C. ciliatum= _Baker._

Neck of rootstock crowned with a ring of bristles. Leaves 3-4, with
sheathing base and lanceolate blade, 4-6 in. long, ciliated on margin.
Ped. slender, up to as long as leaves; racemes usually simple, dense
upwards, ab. 3 in. long, lower 3-4-nate, ab. ⅓ in. long. Per. ¼ in.
long. Caps. ⅓ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk Ali).


=C. tenuifolium= _Baker._

Leaves 5-6 to a stem, linear, 12-18 long, ⅓-½ in. broad, narrowed to
base. Ped. long, slender; rac. lax, cylindric, up to 6-9 in. long;
pedicels solitary ab. ⅓ in. long, articulated below the middle. Per. ⅓
in. long, segm. linear, white with a green keel; anthers small; caps.
subglobose, emarginate, ⅓ in. long.

Mongalla Prov.


=C. andongense= _Baker._

Tall herb. Leaves up to 2 ft. long, oblanceolate. Ped. up to 3 ft. long,
bearing a lax panicle of many ascending racemes 1-2 ft. long; pedicels
articulated at middle, lower 5-6-nate, finally 1 in. long. Per. ab. ½
in. long, brownish-green or white with 3-nerved green keel. Caps.
oblong, ⅓-½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Mongalla Prov.:
Bor).


=C. longifolium= _Schweinfth._

Rootstock horizontal, crowned with bristles. Leaves ab. 6 to a stem,
firm, linear, 12-18 in. long, ½-¾ in. broad, ciliate on margin. Ped.
12-18 in. long; rac. simple, 3-5 in. long, dense; pedicels very short,
lower 2-3-nate. Per ⅓ in. long, segm. lanceolate; anthers small. Caps.
deeply emarginate ¼-⅓ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=C. micranthum= _Baker._

Neck of root crowned with a dense ring of fibres. Produced leaves firm,
linear, 4-6 in. long, ¼ in. broad. Ped. slender, as long as leaves; rac.
lax, simple or forked, at length 6-8 in. long; pedicels very short,
artic. at middle, lower 3-4-nate. Per. greenish-white, ⅛ in. long; segm.
linear laxly 3-nerved; anthers minute. Caps. ⅙ in diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba).


=C. tuberosum= _Baker._ SHANDAHA or SHANDAHAT & ASLANGA—Arab.

Root fibres bearing tubers at end; rootstock crowned with a dense ring
of bristles. Leaves 6-10, firm, lanceolate, base sheathing the stem,
3-12 in. long, ciliated at margin. Rac. 5-6 in. long, including ped.,
often forked near the base; fl. fairly dense on rachis, white; pedic.
short, artic. below middle, lower 2-3-nate. Per. ½ in. and more long;
segm. oblong, obscurely 7-nerved; filam. ⅙-¼ in. long; anthers ab. same
length, linear, curling after dehiscence. Caps. obovoid, ⅓ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Blue Nile Prov. (Abu Haraz & Dinder
River); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (southwards from
Hillet Abbas); Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Jebel.

Edible.


=C. polystachyum= _Baker._

Neck of rootstock crowned with a few bristles. Produced leaves ab. 6 to
a stem, linear, ab. 1 ft. long, ¼-⅓ in. broad. Ped. as long as leaves;
rac. several, panicled, lax, the lower forked; pedic. ⅙-¼ in. long,
artic. at middle, lower 3-4-nate; per. campanulate, ⅛ in. long; segm.
green with white margin; anthers minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. breviscapum= _Dalz._

Rootstock erect, not bristly. Leaves linear-lanceolate, up to 9 in. long
and 1¼ in. broad. Racemes longer than the leaves; bracts lanceolate,
acuminate, about ½ in. long, ciliolate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambe).


=C. Tinneæ= _Baker._

Root leaves not known. Ped. very slender 6-12 in. long, bearing several
linear reduced leaves. Rac. very lax 6 in. long; pedic. very short,
lower 2-3-nate. Per. 1/5 in. long; segm. oblong with 3-nerved keel; sta.
rather shorter than per.; anthers linear, twice as long as filam.;
ovules 12 in a cell.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur).


=C. spp.=

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Wau); Mongalla Prov. (Lado: Doka’s, &
Kagulu).


766 =Dasystachys aurea= _Baker._

Herb; leaves 5-6 to a stem, erect, glabrous, linear, 24-30 in. long, 1
in. broad at middle, base sheathing, margins obscurely ciliated. Ped.
erect, 3 ft. long, bearing a few reduced leaves, pubescent. Raceme
subspicate, 6-12 in. long; lower bracts large, lanceolate; fl. at first
clothed with golden pubescence. Per. ¼ in. long; segm. 6, oblong, white
with red-brown keel; sta. 6, as long as per.; anthers longer than
filam.; style much exserted. Caps. deeply 3-lobed; seeds flat.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba, Niamniam-land: Hu
River).


767 =Allium (Molium) spathaceum= _Steud._

Herb; bulb globose 3 in. diam. Leaves 1-2, linear, thin, up to 9 in.
long. Ped. 4-9 in. long; umbel of 10-15 fl.; spathe of 1 short ovate
valve; pedic. ½-¾ in. long. Per. ⅙ in. long, white; segm. with distinct
brown keel; sta. 6.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


=A. ascalonicum= _Linn._

Herb; bulb ovoid, ¾ in. diam. Leaves few, linear, up to 1 ft. long and ¼
in. broad. Peduncle longer than the leaves, stout; pedicels slender,
crowded, about ⅓ in. long. Per. ⅙ in. long, white.

Kordofan Prov. (Bara).


=A. alibile= _A. Rich._

Bulb globose, ab. 1 in. diam. Leaves not known. Ped. 18 in. long; umbel
many-flowered; pedic. short; spathe short, many-valved. Per.
campanulate, pale rose, segm. ovate-obl., acute; filam. of 3 inner sta.
tri-cuspidate, 3 outer lanceolate.

Sudan?


768 =Dipcadi unifolium= _Baker._

Bulb ½ in. diam. Leaf 1, linear, 6-7 in. long, base long sheathing. Ped.
ab. 5 in. long; rac. laxly 3-6 flowered; pedic. very short. Per. green
as others in this genus; tube ⅙ in. long; inner segm. flat, ⅙ in. long,
outer caudate, 1/5 in. long; anthers subsessile.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Gendua River).


=D. fesoghlense= _Baker._

Leaves 2, 6-8 in. long, very narrow. Ped. 4 in. long; rac. laxly many-
flowered; pedic. very short. Per. ½ in. long, tube and inner segm. ¼
in., outer segm. caudate, just longer.

Red Sea Prov. (Dongonab); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli & Jongol’s Post).


=D. filifolium= _Baker._

Bulb ab. ½ in. diam. Leaves 2, subterete, 1 ft. long. Ped. 1 ft. or
more; rac. lax 3-10 flowered; pedic. short. Per. fulvous green; tube and
inner segm. ⅙ in., outer up to ⅓ in. long.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Sobat mouth); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas).


=D. tacazzeanum= _Baker._

Bulb 1 in. diam. Leaves 2-3, linear, flat, 3-4 in. long. Ped. 6-9 in.
long; rac. 6-12 flowered; pedic. very short. Per. tube and inner segm. ¼
in. long respectively, outer segm. ⅓ in., subulate-falcate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Abu Gurun’s Zariba); Mongalla Prov.
(Mongalla).


=D. lanceolatum= _Baker._

Leaves 4-5, lanceolate, 3-4 in. long. Ped. 8-18 in. long; rac. very lax,
½-1 ft. long; pedic. very short. Per. tube ab. 1/5 in. long; inner segm.
a little longer, outer complicate, ab. ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gir).


769 =Drimia laxiflora= _Baker._

Bulb and leaves not known. Ped. slender, 15-18 in. long; rac. very lax,
6-8 in. long; lower pedic. up to ½ in. long. Per. gamophyllous, ab. ⅓
in. long, greenish-brown; tube campanulate; segm. oblong twice as long
as tube; style slightly exserted. Caps. deeply lobed; seeds flat.

White Nile Prov. (Khor Attar).


770 =Albuca tayloriana= _Rendle._

Bulb ¾ in. diam. Leaves radical, narrow-linear. Ped. ab. 2 ft. long;
rac. 4-5 in. long, laxly 10-12 fld., cylindrical; lower pedic. ⅓ in.
long. Per. segm. free, ½ in. long, outer spreading, oblong greenish-
white, with a broad, purple, 7-nerved keel, inner segm. connivent,
hooded; sta. 6, filam. subulate; style subulate, more than twice length
of ovary. Caps. 3-valved; seeds flat, black.

Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla to Gemeiza).


=A. Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Bulb 1 in. diam. Leaves linear, 24-30 in. long, ⅓ in. broad. Ped. longer
than leaves; rac. 1 ft. or more, 20-30 fld.; pedic. short; lower bracts
up to 1½ in. long. Per. nearly 1 in. long; segm. linear-obl., pale
yellow with a broad red-brown keel. Caps. ovoid, ab. ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam: at the River Buddu, near Abu Samat’s
Zariba).


=A. purpurascens= _Engl._

Bulb 2-3 in. diam. Leaves linear 12-18 in. long. Ped. slightly longer;
rac. 6-8 in. long, 10-15 fld.; pedic. half as long as fl.; lower bracts
ab. ½ in. long. Per. ab. ½ in. long; segm. lin.-obl., with a broad
purplish keel. Caps. ovoid, ab. ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba, Jur River;
Mittu; Kuragerra & Dimindu).


=A. Steudneri= _Schweinfth._

Bulb over 1 in. diam. Leaves 6-10 in. long, ⅓-½ in. broad below. Ped. 1
ft. or more long; rac. lax, 8-10 fld.; pedic. half as long as fl. Per.
over ½ in. long; segm. linear, with a broad green keel. Caps. oblong, ½
in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


771 =Urginea micrantha= _Solms._ ABUTKULA—Hadendowa.

Bulb 2-3 in. diam. Leaves linear, appearing after the flowers. Ped. 1-2
ft. long; raceme 12-18 in., moderately dense; pedic. rigid, jointed at
apex, up to ¾ in. long. Per. ⅙ in. long, segm. 6, free, white with
1-nerved brown keel; sta. 6, shorter than per.; anthers versatile,
small. Caps. globose, acutely angled, ¼ in. diam.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Fung Prov. (Roseires, Jongol’s Post, etc.,
etc.); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 5,800 ft.); South of 13° N.L.; Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba, Abu Gurun’s Zariba; Mittu at
Reggo; Dar Fertit; Deim Zubeir & near Chak-Chak).

The starch contained in the bulbs is used by the Hadendowas to stiffen
their hair.


=U. indica= _Kunth._

Bulb and leaves much as above. Ped. 1-2 ft. long; rac. 6-12 in., very
lax; pedic. ascending, lower 1-2 in. long. Per. ⅓-½ in. long; segm.
whitish, keel brownish-green, 2-3 nerved. Caps. oblong, ½-¾ in. long.

Fung Prov. (J. Moya & Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Meshra El
Rek).

The bruised bulbs are applied as a poultice for rheumatic pains or
contusions.


=U. Petitiana= _Solms._

Bulb 1½ in. diam. Leaves linear, appearing after fl. Ped. up to 2 ft.
long; raceme 6 in., dense above; pedic. very short; bracts linear, ¼-⅓
in. long. Per. 1/5 in. long, segm. white; keel 2-3 nerved, greenish-
brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Mongalla Prov. (Bor to Mongalla).


=U. nigritana= _Baker._

Bulb moderately large. Leaves linear, channelled, 12-18 in. long. Ped.
18-24 in. long; rac. up to 18 in., lax; upper pedic. short, lower up to
1½ in.; bracts up to ¾ in. long. Per. ab. ¾ in. long, segm. whitish with
a broad 5-nerved red-brown keel. Caps. ovoid, ½-¾ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Mittu: Dimindu; Niamniam-land: River Buddu).


772 =Scilla spicata= _Baker._

Bulb 1 in. diam. Leaves 2, lanceolate, 2-5 in. long. Ped. 4-6 in. long;
spike 1-2 in., dense. Per. campanulate, bright purple; segm. 6,
1-nerved, minute; sta. 6, short; anthers versatile. Caps. 3-valved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau River).


=S. edulis= _Engl._ MAKPĀRA—Bongo.

Bulb over ½ in. diam. Leaves 4-6, linear, up to 3 in. long. Ped.
slender, 2-3 in. long; raceme up to 2 in. long, fairly dense; pedic.
short; per. mauve-purple, ⅛ in. long; sta. ab as long, filam. mauve-
purple.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=S. indica= _Baker._

Bulb up to 2 in. diam. Leaves 5-6, lanceolate, 6 in. long, sheathing.
Ped. ab. 6 in. long; rac. 3-4 in. lax; ped. ¼-⅓ in. longer, lower
drooping. Per. campanulate, greenish-purple, ⅛ in. long; filam. purple.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=S. Schweinfurthii= _Engl._

Bulb ¾ in. diam. Leaves 3-6, linear, 2-3 in. long. Ped. 2-3 in. long;
raceme ab. 1½ in. lax, lower fl. drooping; centr. pedic. ⅙ in. long.
Per. campanulate, green, ⅙ in. long; filam. pale.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. mæsta= _Baker._

Bulb ab. 1½ in. diam. Leaves 5-6, lanceolate with a few purple spots,
4-6 in. long. Ped. 2-3 to a bulb, ab. 4 in. long; rac. 1-2 in. dense,
lower ped. drooping, ⅓ in. long. Per. campanulate, green, ⅛ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=S. modesta= _Baker._

Bulb ab. 1½ in. diam. Leaves 2, obl. or lanc., 2-6 in. long. Ped. 2-6
in. long; rac. 2-3 in., lax; pedic. ab. ⅙ in. long. Per. campanulate,
green, ⅛ in. long; filam. pale.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Wau).


=S. chlorantha= _Baker._

Bulb 1½ in. diam. Leaves 3, obl. or obl.-lanc., 6 in. long, 1-2 in.
broad, sheathing at base. Ped. 4 in. long; rac. 3-5 in., moderately
dense; pedic. ab. ⅙ in. long. Per. campanulate, green, ⅛ in. long;
filam. green.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. lilacina= _Baker._ BASSAL EL KELB, KILGA & BERID (Blue Nile)—Arab.

Bulb ½ in. diam. Leaves 6-8, obl.-lanc., thin, 3-4 in. long, ab. 1 in.
broad. Ped. 4-6 in. long; rac. 3-5 in., lax; pedic. ab. ⅓ in. long. Per.
tubular-campanulate, ¼ in. long, pale purple; filam. bright mauve-
purple.

Blue Nile Prov. (Abu Haraz); Upper White Nile Prov. (Renk); Kordofan
Prov.


=S. cf. S. lanceæfolia= _Baker._

Leaves obl. or obl.-lanc., spotted dark green. Rac. 2-3 in. long; pedic.
longer than fl. Per. campanulate, purplish, ab. ¼ in. long; filam.
purple.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


773 =Ornithogalum Eckloni= _Schlecht._

Bulb 1-2 in. diam. Leaves 4-6, linear, 1-2 ft. long, ab. ¾ in. broad
near base. Ped. fairly stout 18-24 in. long; rac. 3-4 in., rather dense;
pedic. short, ascending. Per. ¼ in. long; segm. free, obl., white with
green keel; sta. 6, hypogynous, shorter than per.; filam. linear;
anthers versatile. Caps. globose, ¼ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


774 =Gloriosa virescens= _Lindl._ HABALEKO—Rashida.

Sarmentose herb climbing by means of prehensile leaf-tips. Leaves
usually obl. or obl.-lanc., with tendril-like tips, 5-6 in. long, the
lower verticillate or opp. Infl. a lax terminal corymb; pedic. long,
nodding at tip. Per. ab. 2 in. long; segm. free, lanceolate-cuspidate,
slightly or not crisped, usually bright red, ultimately strongly
reflexed; sta. 6, hypogynous, shorter than per.; style over 1 in. long,
3-forked above. Caps. ab. 2 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora); Kordofan Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov. (Kio);
Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas &
Wau; Shambe); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla & Lado. Asugi).

Probably has medicinal properties; the tuber is poisonous.


=G. virescens= _Lindl._ =var. grandiflora= _Baker._

Fl. larger; per. segm. 3-4 in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Abu Kuka).


                            =PONTEDERIACEÆ.=


775 =Eichornia natans= _Solms._

Aquatic herb; stems floating or creeping in the mud. Submerged leaves
sessile, linear, 2-4 in. long; floating leaves petiolate, ½-1 in. long,
½-1 in. broad ovate or orbicular, cordate; produced sheath of petiole
(so-called stipule) up to 1¼ in. long. Fl. apparently issuing from below
middle of pet. of floating leaves. Perianth inferior; segm. 5, united
below, blue, ¼ in. diam.; sta. 6; ovary 3-celled; style shortly 3-6
lobed. Caps. spindle-shaped, ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: between Gir & Addai; Ghazal R.).


776 =Heteranthera kotschyana= _Fenzl._

Aquatic herb; stem creeping in the mud. Leaves 1-3 in. long ovate,
cordate; pet. 2-8 in. long, whose sheath embraces the membranous spathe
out of which issues the 2-4 in. long spike. Per. segm. 6; sta. 3. Caps.
½-¾ in. long.

Kordofan Prov. (between Melbes & El Obeid); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gurfala).


777 =Monochoria africana= _N.E. Br._

Aquatic herb. Leaves radical, 3-4 in. long, ovate, acuminate, slightly
cordate; pet. long. Flowering stems 11-14 in. long with a leaf or
tubular leaf-sheath at their summit enclosing a filiform-pointed spathe
1 in. long. Raceme 2-4 in. long, emerging from the spathe. Per. segm. 6,
free, blue or violet; sta. 6, unequal, the filam. of largest toothed;
stigma of 3 bifid lobes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


                              =TACCACEÆ.=


778 =Tacca pinnatifida= _Forst._

Rootstock tuberous, up to 1 ft. diam. Leaves radical, long-petioled (1-3
ft. long), large, dividing into 3 forked branches; final segments ovate
or lanceolate. Fl. many in an umbel; ped. 1-3 ft. long; bracts 4-6 in a
whorl; per. superior; segm. 6, all small, greenish-brown; sta. 6, filam.
hooded, purple; stigma peltate; lobes 3, bifid; berry 1 in. long,
subglobose.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Bor to Gigging, Yei River).

The tuber yields starch, which is said to be similar to arrow-root, but
of poor quality. It is not cultivated, but is gathered wild and eaten.


                            =DIOSCOREACEÆ.=


779 =Dioscorea (Helmia) sativa= _Linn._ MAYDOK or NYTI, also MERE
(aerial tuber) & BARANDOKA (undergr. tuber)—Zande. The Yam.

Herbaceous twiner with edible tuber. Leaves alt., ovate or orbicular,
cuspidate, cordate, 1 ft. long, 7-9 nerved, often with bulbils in the
axils. Infl. diœcious, spicate, the male spikes fascicled at leafless
nodes. Male fl. minute; per. segm. 6; sta. 6. Fem. fl. also minute; per.
segm. 6; styles 3. Caps. deeply 3-lobed; seeds broadly winged at base.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land);
Mongalla Prov. (Sheikh Tombé).

The plant is cultivated throughout Tropical Africa for food, and flour
being made from the dried tubers.


=D. sagittifolia= _Pax._

Twining herb with tuberous root. Leaves triangular-sagittate, 4-5 in.
long, 5-nerved. Male spikes geminate. Fem. fl. and fruit unknown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Okale).

Tuber probably edible.


=D. alata= _Linn._

Twiner with 4-winged stem; tuber large, edible. Leaves usually opp.,
ovate-acuminate, cordate, 7-nerved, 6-9 in. long. Caps. glabrous, 1¼ in.
diam., 3-winged; seeds orbicular, winged all round.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River). Cultivated, see
above _D. sativa_ L.


=D. abyssinica= _Hochst._

Twiner; stem terete. Leaves ovate-acuminate, cordate, 7-nerved, 3-4 in.
long. Caps. orbicular, deeply-lobed, 1¼ in. diam.; seeds orbicular,
winged all round.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas).


=D. schimperiana= _Hochst._

Leaves as above, but 5-nerved and rather larger and hairy. Infl.
pubescent. Caps. with 3 orbicular lobes, 1 in. long and 1½ in. diam.;
seeds orbicular, winged all round.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumango Hill); Fung Prov.
(Bunzaga).


=D. (Helmia) dumetorum= _Pax._

Twiner, often prickly. Leaves 3-fol., pubescent beneath; end leaflet
obovate, cuspidate, 5-6 in. long, side leaflets oblique. Male fl. in
short axillary panicles; fem. fl. laxly racemed. Caps. 3-angled, 2 in.
long; seeds 1 in. long, with large basal wing.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Nuba Mts. Prov. (Khor Ganna near
Kadugli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Tuhami’s Zariba);
Mongalla Prov. (Lado Dist.: Yambi Khor).

Poisonous, but can be rendered edible by pounding and washing.


=D. phaseoloides= _Pax._

Unarmed twiner. Leaves 3-fol.; end leaflet oblong, 2½ in. long. Male fl.
in fascicled axillary spikes; fem. fl. and fr. unknown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Gumango Hill).


=D. (Helmia) beccariana= _Martelli f._

Unarmed twiner. Leaves 5-fol.; leaflets obovate or oblong 3-4 in. long.
Male fl. in fascicled axillary spikes. Fem. fl. in long lax spikes.
Caps. oblong, acutely 3-angled, ¾ in. long; seeds with long oblong basal
wing.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas).


                            =COMMELINACEÆ.=


780 =Palisota Schweinfurthii= _C. B. Ce._

Herb 3-7 ft. long; young parts shaggy with fulvous or greyish hairs.
Leaves whorled up to 26 by 8 in., elliptic, densely hairy on the margin.
Flowers in a dense cylindric panicle, very numerous.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Boddo R. & Nabambisso R.).


781 =Commelina nudiflora= _Linn._ BE-EID (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Marsh herb; stems decumbent, 1-2 ft. long. Leaves alt., 1-3 in. long,
lanceolate; sheaths 1-2 in. long. Infl. of 2 racemes enclosed in a
folded ovate-lanceolate, ½-2 in. long spathe; fl. 1-3 in the lower and
3-8 in upper rac.; sep. 3; pet. 3, 2 with long claws, blue; sta. 2-3
perfect, 2-3 sterile; seeds 5, reticulated.

White Nile Prov.; Upper White Nile Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.
& J. Marra 4-5,500 ft.); Bahr El Jebel (Sudd from southwards); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).

It is said to be medicinal and to be eaten by cattle.


=C. subulata= _Roth._

Weak herb 6-15 in. long. Leaves 2 in. long, linear. Spathes nearly
sessile, ½ in. long ovate. Fl. blue, hardly exserted from spathe; seeds
5, pitted and wrinkled.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad).


=C. benghalensis= _Linn._ BAYAD (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Hairy herb, 1-3 ft. long. Leaves ovate-elliptic 1-3½ in. long; spathes
subsessile, funnel-shaped by lower margins being connate ⅓ in., ½-⅔ in.
long, crowded near tips of branches; seeds 5, rough or wrinkled.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, near Suakin, Khor Tamanib); Kassala Prov.
(Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Upper White Nile Prov.
(Meshra El Zeraf); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).

The fleshy rhizomes sometimes contain much starch and are wholesome food
when cooked.


=C. Forskalæi= _Vahl._ DUEID (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; NIOK (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka.

Pubescent branched herb, 8-24 in. long. Leaves oblong, up to 2 in. long.
Spathes ½-⅔ in. long, funnel-shaped on ped. up to ⅓ in. long. Pet. blue;
seeds 1-3, smooth.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Wadi Erkowit, Suakin, Sea-coast to between
3,000-4,000 ft.); Kassala Prov. Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post);
Kordofan Prov. (Bir Sodari, J. Kurbaj, El Obeid); White Nile Prov. (J.
Arashkol); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


=C. africana= _Linn._

Glabrous trailing herb, 1-3 ft. long. Leaves up to 3 in., oblong
subsessile. Spathes 1-2 in. long, folded, ovate on ped. up to ⅔ in.
long. Pet. yellow; seeds reticulated.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River, Makporru Hill).


=C. involucrosa= _A. Rich._

Large herb. Leaves 1½-5 in. long, lanceolate, pubescent. Spathes 2½ in.
long, simply folded; ped. 1 in. long. Fl. probably yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib).


=C. krebsiana= _Kunth._

Leaves hairy on both sides when mature, otherwise as _C. africana_.

Red Sea Prov. (near Erkowit); Upper White Nile Prov. (mouth of Bahr El
Jebel).


=C. Kotschyi= _Hassk._

Glabrous herb. Leaves 2 in. long, lin.-lanceolate, subsessile, often
crenulated. Spathes subsessile, ½-⅔ in. long, broadly ovate, 1-3 near
ends of branches. Pet. intensely blue. Caps. small, constricted; seeds
smooth, brown.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


=C. imberbis= _Hassk._

Herb, 1-2 ft. high; internodes 2-3 in. long. Leaves narrow- to ovate-
lanceolate, 5 in. long, the upper sessile, often auricled at base. Ped.
few, scattered, exserted ½-1½ in. Spathes broadly ovate, ab. 1 in. long,
margins free or nearly so. Pet. blue. Caps. ¼ in. long; seeds 4, nearly
smooth, brown.

Fung Prov. (Roseires).


=C. latifolia= _A. Rich._

Slightly hairy herb; internodes long. Leaves obl.-lanc., sessile, upper
cordate or nearly sagittate, 3½ in. long. Ped. 1-2 at top of branch,
exserted ½-1 in.; spathes broadly ovate, ¾ in. long, margins shortly
connate at base. Pet. blue. Caps. ¼ in. long; seeds 4, nearly smooth,
brown.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Haraza).


=C. bracteosa= _Hassk._

Slightly hairy herb, 15 in. high; internodes 2 in. long. Leaves
elliptic-acuminate, 3½ in. long. Ped. 1-2 at ends of branches, slightly
exserted; spathes broadly ovate, ab. 1 in. long, slightly white-hairy,
margins connate at base. Pet. blue. Caps. ⅙ in. long, papery; seeds 3.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambe).


=C. æthiopica= _C. B. Clarke._

Tufted herb, 8-14 in. high; internodes 1-2½ in. long. Leaves broadly
obl.-lanc., 3½ in. long. Ped. 1-2 at ends of branches, hardly exserted;
spathes and fl. as above. Caps. 2-seeded.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Barboi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Jur Ghattas,
Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba).


782 =Aneilema sinicum= _Lindl._

Herb; stems 1-3 ft. long. Leaves linear, 8-10 in. long, ¼ in. broad.
Infl. a cymose panicle, subtended by a bract (not spathe) ½-2 in. long,
lin.-lanc. Sep. 3, minute; pet. 3, blue or dull purple, ¼ in. long or
more; sta. 6, 2 fertile; filam. bearded at base. Caps. 1/5 in. long;
seeds 6.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Agad Zariba, Wau); Mongalla Prov. (Bor
southwards).

=var.= (β) =longifolia= _C. B. Clarke._

Rather larger in all parts; fertile sta. sometimes 3.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas; Niamniam-land: Sway River).


=A. tacazzeanum= _Hochst._

Weak decumbent herb, 1-2 ft. long. Leaves elliptic, 3 in. long. Fl. in
terminal cymose panicles; bracts minute, ovate. Pet. probably yellow;
filam. bearded at base; seeds 2-6.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Gwob).


=A. beniniense= _Kunth._

Trailing herb, 1-2 ft. long. Leaves ovate-elliptic or obl., acuminate,
2-5 in. long. Fl. in 1-2 terminal panicles; cyme peduncles often 100 or
more. Pet. very small, blue or white; fertile sta. usually 3, filam.
without hairs; seeds 5-7.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: by the Linduku River & Nabambisso
River).


=A. Schweinfurthii= _C. B. Clarke._

Minutely pubescent herb; stems 8-14 in. high. Leaves on barren stems
obl.-lin., 4½ in. long but on flowering stems few, oblong, 1-2 in. long.
Pan. terminal, dense, pubescent, at length 1¼ by ¾ in.; bracts and
bracteoles small. Pet. small, blue. Caps. nearly ¼ in. long, white; 4
seeded.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas; Bongo: Gir. Khor Ajok, between
Wau & Chakchak).


=A. near A. soudanicum= _C. B. Clarke._

Hispid herb, up to 15 in. high. Leaves obl. or elliptic-lanc., sessile,
obtuse, 3 in. long, lowest reduced to scales. Pan. dense, 1½ by ¾ in.
terminal; bracts ⅙ in. long, bracteoles smaller. Pet. white or pale
blue.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=A. pedunculosum= _C. B. Clarke._

Weak, trailing, sparsely hairy herb; stems 6-24 in. long. Leaves
elliptic or ovate, acuminate, 2 in. long. Pan. terminal, small,
frequently on short lateral branches; sep. minute; pet. very small,
blue; fertile sta. usually 3, filam. slightly bearded. Caps. 1/5 in.
long, shining, pale; seeds 4, pale.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambe).


=A. Russegeri= _C. B. Clarke._

Much like _A. Schweinfurthii_.

Nubia; Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


783 =Cyanotis hirsuta= _Fisch._ & _Mey._

Stems from a bulb; flowers in small heads exserted from the leaf-
sheaths; leaves oblong-lanceolate.

Red Sea Prov. (Karora Hills).


=C. lanata= _Benth._

Annual with fine woolly hair when young; stems 4-18 in. long. Leaves
narrowly obl.-lanc.; up to 3 in. long. Infl. scattered, axillary and
peduncled, of 1-4 clustered scorpioid cymes ab. ½ in. diam.; outermost
bract usually ½-1 in. long; bracts falcate, in 2 rows or densely packed.
Sep. 3, more or less connate at base; pet. 3, small, blue (?), the claws
more or less coherent into a tube; sta. 6, perfect; filam. bearded.
Caps. thin, 3-celled; seeds 5-6.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas, Bongo: Gurfala).


=C. djurensis= _C. B. Clarke._

Herb with white wool on young parts; sterile stem short, bearing linear
leaves up to 10 in. by ½ in.; flowering stems 12-20 in. long with linear
leaves 6 in. long when present. Heads of several clustered cymes; outer
bracts to terminal heads 2-3 in. long, linear; bracts distinctly
2-ranked; fl. blue.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas);
Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=C. Cæspitosa= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Herb, at first villous, then glabrate; sterile stems abrupt; basal
leaves tufted, obl.-lanc., 3 in. long, shaggy at base. Leaves on
flowering stems 0-1 (besides floral leaves) reduced to sheaths with a
triangular point. Fl. heads hardly ½ in. long of 1 or few cymes; outer
bracts ½-1 in. long; falcate bracts 2-seriate in cymes, hairy. Fl. red.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


784 =Floscopa rivularis= _C. B. Clarke._

Decumbent herb; stems 1-2 ft. long. Leaves obl.-lanc., sessile on
sheaths 2-4 in. long. Panicle 1-2½ in. long, dense, brown-hairy,
terminal. Sep. 3; pet. 3, purple or rose; sta. 6; filam.-naked; caps.
2-valved, 2-seeded, small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=F. Schweinfurthii= _C. B. Clarke._

Thinly hairy annual, 6-8 in. high. Leaves ovate-lanc., sessile, 2 in.
long. Pan. terminal, leafy; cymes 1½ in. long, hairy, dense. Caps.
minute. Colour of fl. not known, probably yellow.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Sabbi and Kulengo).


=F. flavida= _C. B. Clarke._

Slightly hairy annual, 2-5 in. high. Leaves lanc., sessile, 2½ in. long.
Pan. terminal, slender; cymes few, ½-1½ in. long. Cal. purple; cor.
yellow. Caps. small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Agada, Jur Ghattas, Abu Gurun’s Zariba).


                            =AMARYLLIDACEÆ.=


785 =Hypoxis angustifolia= _Lam._

Tuberous-rooted herb. Leaves 6-12, radical, 6-12 in. long. Ped. 1-4,
shorter than leaves. Corymbs lax 2-6 flowered; per. yellow, ⅓ in. long,
3 outer segm. green and hairy outside; sta. 6; stigmas 3; ovary
inferior, 3-celled, as in all this family.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=H. sp.=

Leaves few, linear, 9-12 in. long, 1/5 in. broad, 3-nerved, thinly
pilose. Flower (only 1 seen) ⅓ in. long, long-pilose outside; segments
yellow, ovate-lanceolate.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River: Kagulu).


786 =Curculigo gallabatensis= _Schweinfth._

Herb; tuber 2 in. long. Leaves 3-4, linear, plicate, 1-2 ft. long. Fl.
solitary; per. superior, base adnate to ovary, produced into a beak-like
tube, 2 in. long; segm. 6, yellow, spreading, ab. ½ in. long, the 3
outer lobes reddish and hairy outside; sta. 6; stig. 3, united.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: banks of the River Gendua); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas and by the River Wau); Mongalla Prov. (Gemeiza).


787 =Crinum tinneanum= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Bulbed herb; leaves not known. Fl. 12-30 in an umbel, rose-red; spathes
2-3 in. long; per. tube 3 in. long; segm. 6, linear, spreading, 1½ in.
long; sta. 6, filiform; anthers versatile; stigma capitate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main-river); Bahr El Jebel (Gondokoro).


=C. purpurascens= _Herb._

Bulbed herb. Leaves numerous, strap-shaped, 1½-3 ft. long. Ped. shorter
than leaves; fl. 4-6 in an umbel, red; spathes 2-3 in. long; per. tube
5-6 in. long; segm. 2-3 in. long, lanceolate; sta. 6, filaments 2-3 in.
long, purple; style capitate, longer than stamens.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Wau and Deim Zubeir.)


=C. ammocharoides= _Baker._

Leaves 6-8 to a bulb, 1 ft. long, 1 in. broad. Ped. stout, compressed,
3-6 in. long, bearing an umbel of 10-20 bright-red flowers; spathes 2-3
in. long; per. tube 3-4 in. long; segm. linear, 2-3 in. long; sta. 6,
filaments bright red, 2-3 in. long; style capitate, rather longer.

Kordofan Prov. (Obeid); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. pauciflorum= _Baker._

Bulb 2-3 in. diam. Leaves 6-8, 12-18 in. long, only ¼ in. broad, erect.
Ped. slender, 6-8 in. long; fl. 1-2 to an umbel; spathe valves 2-3 in.
long. Per. tube curved, 4-5 in. long; segm. 3 in. long, 1 in. broad,
acute, white with a distinct red keel. Filaments 1 in. shorter than per.
segm.; anthers ½ in. long; style overtopping anthers.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. scabrum= _Herb._ LANGABO—Golo.

Bulb 5-6 in. diam. Leaves 12 or more, 2-3 ft. long, 1½-2 in. broad at
middle, scabrous at margin. Ped. fairly stout, 1-2 ft. long; umbel 4-8
flowered; spathe valves 2-3 in. long. Per. tube curved, greenish, 4-5
in. long; segm. ab. 3 in. long, 1 in. broad, acute, white with a
distinct red keel; filam. rather shorter than and style reaching tip of
per. segm.

Fung. Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid); Darfur Prov.
(Kulme and J. Marra, 5,000 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas,
Bongo: Gir).


=C. giganteum= _Andr._

Differs from above by leaves 3-4 in. broad in middle and narrowing to
the base and by the pure white flowers.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (between Rumbek and Shambé);
Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


788 =Hæmanthus multiflorus= _Martyn._ GASH-EL-FIL—Arab; OU—Golo.

Bulb 2-3 in. diam. Leaves 3-4, 6-12 in. long, 3-4 in. broad. Ped.
separate from the leafy stem; fl. in dense globose umbels, 3-6 in.
diam., blood-red; spathe-valves 6-8, 2 in. long. Per. tube cylindric, ½
in. long; segm. linear, 3-nerved, 1 in. long; filam. longer than per.
segm.; fruit a scarlet berry.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Bahr El
Jebel.


=H. filiflorus= _Hiern._

Differs from above chiefly by broader leaves, 5-6 in. broad and 1-nerved
per. segments.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir, Jur: Jur Ghattas, Dar Fertit:
Pongo River).


=H. rupestris= _Baker._

Bulb small. Leaves 2, 6 in. long, 4 in. broad. Spathe valves 4-5,
reddish, 1½ in. long; per. segm. 3-nerved, ½ in. long.

Kordofan Prov. (Melbes).


789 =Pancratium tortuosum= _Herb._

Bulb long-necked, 2 in. diam. Leaves 6-12, 6-12 in. long, spirally
twisted. Ped. very short; umbel 2-4 flowered; spathe valve 1. Per. tube
5-6 in. long; segm. linear, white. Filam. connate into a cup 1 in. long,
toothed between the filam. tips, all white.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Erkowit, between Suakin and Khor Tamanib).


=P. trianthum= _Herb._ ATTAB—Golo.

Leaves 6-8, 12 in. or more, not twisted. Umbel of 1-3 flowers; spathe
valves and teeth of staminal cup bifid, otherwise as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Red Sea Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas and Jur Aweit); Bahr El Jebel.


=P. maximum= _Forsk._

Leaves 4-5. Ped. 1-flowered; per. tube greenish, 4 in. long; segm. 2½
in., white; cup 2 in. long, faintly lobed.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin).


                              =IRIDACEÆ.=


790 =Lapeyrousia abyssinica= _Baker._

Herb with bulbous stem (corm), 6-12 in. high. Leaves 3-4, distichous,
3-6 in. long. Spikes lax 2-6 flowered; per. corolline, lilac, 6-lobed, ¾
in. long; sta. 3, ⅓ in. long; ovary inferior, 3-celled; style
3-branched, branches bifid.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


791 =Tritonia bongensis= _Pax._

Cormed herb; stem 1 ft. long. Leaves 2, distichous, 1 ft. long. Spikes
lax, 3-6 in. long; per. red-purple; tube ⅓ in. long; segm. 6, oblong,
clawed, ¼ in. long; sta. 3; style 3-branched, branches simple, clavate;
ovary inferior.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo; Lessi River); S.E. Sudan.


792 =Gladiolus quartinianus= _A. Rich._

Cormed herb, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves distichous 3-4, 18 in. long. Spikes
6-12 in. long, 6-9 flowered; spathe ab. 2 in. long; per. blood-red, more
commonly pale-yellow; tube 1½ in. long; segm. 6, 2 in. long and 1 in.
broad; sta. 3; style branches 3, spreading, flattened; ovary inferior.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.); Upper White
Nile Prov. (Kio); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-land:
Gumango Hill); Bahr El Jebel.


=G. unguiculatus= _Baker._

Herb with 2-3 sheathing leaves, 18 in. long. Per. 1¼ in. long, white,
tinged with greenish-brown; segm. clawed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Bongo: south-west of Tonj
River).


793 =Romulea Bulbocodium= _Seb._ & _Mauri._

Small crocus-like herb with membranous truncated bulb-scales; leaves
linear, recurved; flowers blue-purplish with yellow anthers; common in
the Mediterranean region.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit, 4,000 ft.).


                            =ZINGIBERACEÆ.=


794 =Kæmpferia æthiopica= _Benth._ TONYANGWI (Bahr El Ghazal)—Dinka;
KAMUTWEN—Jur.

Herb, the handsome solitary flowers appearing out of the ground before
the leaves. Leaves 3-5, oblong-lanceolate, 9-18 in. long. Calyx funnel-
shaped, 1½ in. long; cor. tube exserted from calyx, lobes lanceolate, 1½
in. long, lilac-coloured; fertile sta. 1, anther ½ in. long; staminodes
5, petaloid, ab. 3 in. long, bright red-purple; ovary 3-celled.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Gendua River); Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur: Jur Ghattas, Dar Fertit: between Chak Chak & Deim Zubeir);
Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=K. rosea= _Schweinf._

Flowers pink or lilac with yellow and deep purple streaks, many on a
raceme, contemporary with the leaves.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-
land: Gumango Hill); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


795 =Cadalvena spectabilis= _Fenzl._

Acaulescent herb with leaves in a rosette and few pale-yellow fl., 3 in.
long, on short stalks from the centre. Calyx funnel-shaped, shortly
toothed; cor. lobes 3, lanceolate, 2 in. long; fertile stamen shorter
than cor. lobes; anther ½ in. with pale yellow strap-shaped appendage;
side staminodes small, anterior one (lip) 3 in. long, pale yellow.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur Ghattas).


796 =Costus pterometra= _Schumann._

A tall herb. Leaves obovate or oblanceolate, acute, acuminate, about 8
in. long and 3½ in. broad. Spikes ellipsoid, 3 in. long. Bracts
elliptic.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River).


=C. trachyphyllus= _Schumann._

Tall herb. Leaves oblong ab. 1 ft. long. Spikes many-flowered, 3 in.
long, terminal; outer bracts orbicular, 1¼ in. diam., inner oblong,
membranous. Cal. funnel-shaped, ½ in. long; cor. lobes oblong, 1½ in.
long; fertile sta. 2 in. long petaloid, anther ¼ in., half-way down;
lateral staminodes minute, 2 or absent; lip obovate 3 in. long white or
tipped rose; style filiform, passing between lobes of anther, as in most
others of this family.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Mbrwole & Yuru Rivers).


797 =Amomum polyanthum= _Schumann._ AKORI—Zande.

Stem tall, leafy. Leaves oblong-lanceolate, 1 ft. or more, pilose
beneath. Fl. in a globose head on a basal peduncle 6-12 in. long, with
large, imbricate bracts. Cal. funnel-shaped, slit one side; cor. tube
cylindrical, dorsal lobe boat-shaped, lateral lanceolate spreading;
lateral staminodes 0; lip oblong purplish-yellow 1 in. long: fertile
anther with 3-lobed crest; filaments filiform.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Linduku River); Belgian Congo
(Niamniam-land: Diamvonu Stream).


=A. luteo-album= _Schumann._

Leafy herb with stout root-stock; leaves hairy on veins. Much as above;
lip white with yellow middle.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River); Belgian Congo
(Niamniam-land: Wando Village).


=A. sanguineum= _Schumann._

Stem up to 15 ft. high. Leaves 1½ in. long, pubescent beneath. Infl.
globose, simple or branched, radical; fl. enclosed in large brown
bracts; dorsal cor. lobe bright red, 1½ in. long; lip pale yellow, 1½
in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River); Belgian Congo
(Niamniam-land: Assika & Nabanda & Yuru Rivers).


=A. Korarima= _Pereira._ HABAHAN—Arab; ?NONGA—Zande.

Fruit flask-shaped 2 in. long, flattened one one side, glabrous.

Found in Abyssinia, on the Upper Sobat, from where its fruit is exported
to the Sudan as a kind of Cardamom. It is said to be found also in the
Southern B. El Ghazal Prov.


=A. giganteum= _Oliv._ & _Hamb._

Stems 15-20 ft. Leaves up to 2 ft. long and 6 in. broad. Flowering stem
radical, 2 ft. long; flower spikes distichous enclosed in bracts; cor.
lobes 2 in. long; lip 3 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Sabbi).


=A. spp.=

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Atasilli River
& Yuru River).


                             =MARANTACEÆ.=


798 =Thalia geniculata= _Linn._

Herb, up to 6 ft. high. Leaves with long petioles, sheathing the stem at
the base, blades up to 1 ft. long and 6 in. broad. Infl. in a large lax
panicle; bracts oblong, ½-1 in. long enclosing pairs of flowers; sep. 3,
small; pet. 3, purple; staminodes violet, longer than petals; lip
obovate, purple, crested; anther 1-celled on a narrow lobe.

Sobat River (Nasser); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Niamniam-
land: Gumango Hill).


799 =Clinogyne cuspidata= _K. Schum._

Stems branched and leafy up to 12 ft. high. Leaves 1 ft. or more by 6
in., pinnately streaked with white, cuspidate, with sheathing pet.
Panicles copious: flowers in pairs, one on a longer pedicel; sep. 3, ⅓
in. long; pet. 3; staminodes united in a tube at the base, ⅔ in. long,
yellow or purple; lip obovate, keeled inside; sta. 1, anther 1-celled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land:
Diagbe River).


=C. ugandensis= _K. Schum._

Stems moderately stout. Leaves grey-green, 4-6 in. long, cusp eccentric;
pet. sheath 5 in. long. Fl. much as above.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River District, Doka’s).


=C. azurea= _Schum._

Stems tufted. Leaves 4-8 in. long, lower ones reduced to sheaths, cusp
very acute. Bracts 2-flowered, 1 in. or more long; fl. bright blue, 1
in. long.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Wando’s village).


800 =Trachyphrynium Braunianum= _Baker._

Tall shrub with slender branchlets. Leaves oblong, cuspidate, 3-6 in.
long; sheaths 2-4 in. long. Infl. terminal, simple; bracts oblong-
lanceolate, 1 in. long, enclosing pairs of whitish flowers, 1 in. long;
sep. 3, lanceolate, ½ in. long; pet. 3, connate at base; staminodes
connate, 1 in. long; lip broad obliquely crested; sta. ligulate, anther
adnate, 1-celled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov.
(Lado); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Mbrwole & Atassili Brook).


                               =MUSACEÆ.=


801 =Musa Schweinfurthii= _K. Schum._ et _Warb._ Niamnian-land.

=M. Ensete= _Gmel._ BOGGUMBOLI or BOO—Zande.

Plant 30-40 ft. high with a stem ventricose at base and a plume of
leaves up to 20 ft. long and 3 ft. broad. Fl. in terminal spicate
panicles, unisexual; peduncle short; flowering panicle short; bracts
densely imbricate, dark-brown, the lower 1 ft. long, 4-5 in. broad. Fl.
whitish 1½-2 in. long, in 2 dense rows, each of up to 20 flowers. Fruit
2-3 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=M. paradisiaca= _Linn._ =subsp. sapientum= _O. Ktze._ SHAGAR EL
MUZ—Arab; FATH—Nuer; BEDIGAWA (tall plant with long triangular fruit),
BIRA (medium-sized) & TINGI-TINGI (dwarf plant)—Zande. The Banana Plant.

Cultivated.


                             =ORCHIDACEÆ.=


802 =Microstylis sp.=

Herb about 6 in. high. Leaves 2 or 3, ovate, acute, 2-3 in. long, 1-1½
in. broad, 5-nerved at the base. Peduncle with 3 or 4 bracts. Flowers
subcapitate, flesh-coloured, transparent. Lip bilobed, slightly fringed,
⅙ in. broad.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River District: Ngoi).


803 =Megaclinium sp.=

Epiphyte on tree trunks. Pseudobulbs sessile in the axil, 2 in. long.
Leaves lanceolate, emarginate, 4 in. long, 1 in. broad. Inflorescence
about 1 ft. long. Rhachis 8 in. long, ⅓ in. broad. Flowers sessile,
about 30 in each inflorescence.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River District).


804 =Eulophia lutea= _Lindl._

Ground orchid with corm.-like base. Leaves distichous, usually plicate,
linear to elliptic-lanceolate. Fl. scapes ab. 1 ft. long; racemes lax;
bracts lanceolate, ¼ in. long; 3 sepals and 2 yellow petals ¼ in. long;
lip oblong, 3-lobed; spur oblong 1/10 in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River District; Kagulu Khor).


=E. baginsensis= _Reichb. f._

Ground orchid with conical pseudobulbs. Leaves ensiform 1-2 ft. long, 2
in. broad, crenulate. Scape 3 ft. high, panicled above; bracts ovate
lanceolate ¼ in. long. Sep. 3 and pet. 2 (as in all this family,
excluding the lip); lip oblong, 3-lobed; front lobe rhomboid 3-many-
toothed; spur shorter than ovary.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=E. stachyodes= _Reichb. f._

Ground orchid. Leaves lanceolate-acuminate, 5-10 in. long, appearing
after the fl. Scapes 2 ft. high; racemes 6 in. long, many flowered;
bracts lanceolate, ¾ in. long, green and purple; pet. white, ¾ in. long;
lip white with maroon streaks, 3-lobed; spur curved, 1/10 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Yubbo River); Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River District: Ngoi); Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land).


=E. flavopurpurea= _Rolfe._

Ground orchid. Leaves elongate-linear, under ½ in. broad. Scape 2¼ ft.
high; raceme 1 ft. long, few-flowered; petals yellowish-green, ¾ in.
long; lip ligulate, 3-fid, striped purple; spur retrose, yellow at apex,
small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=E. Woodfordii= _Rolfe._

Ground orchid with tuberous rhizome. Leaves lanceolate, 8-18 in. long,
tapering to sheathing petiole. Scapes up to 3 ft. high; racemes 6-15 in.
long with many greenish and light lilac flowers; sep. ¾ in. long, pet. a
little shorter; lip ¾ in. long, somewhat trilobed, with 4 tubercles;
spur broadly saccate.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River District: Allumas).


=E. Schweinfurthii= _Kraenzl._

Ground orchid. Leaves elongate-linear. Scapes 2 ft. high; racemes few-
flowered; sep. ¼ in. long, orbicular; pet. ¼ in. long, ligulate; lip
3-lobed, 3-ridged; spur stout, conical.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land).


=E. guineensis= _Lindl._

Terrestrial orchid, with large conical pseudobulbs. Leaves lanceolate-
or obovate-oblong, 4-12 in. long; pet. ½-5 in. long. Scapes 2-3 ft.
long; racemes 8-12 in. long, many-flowered; sep. and pet. 1-1½ in. long,
brown; lip pink, ovate; spur ¾-1 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land & Niamniam-land).


=E. sp. near E. Zeyheri= _Sond._

Erect herb about 1½ ft. high. Leaves not seen. Flowers few, beautiful
light yellow with brown lip.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei, Ngoi).


805 =Lissochilus pyrophilus= _Reichb._

In this genus all are terrestrial herbs with elongate lanceolate or
linear, plicate leaves, rising from a creeping rhizome. In this sp.:
scape 18 in. high; racemes 6-10 in. laxly many flowered; fl. brown, sep.
and pet. ¼ in. long; lip 1/5 in. long, 3-lobed; spur minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Kuraggera).


=L. paludicolus= _Reichb. f._

Leaves 1½-2 ft. long, ½ in. broad. Scape 3 ft. long; raceme 10 in. long,
laxly many yellow-flowered; sep. and pet. ½ in. long; lip obscurely
3-lobed, with 3 crenulate ridges; spur saccate, ¼ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ibba River); Bahr El Jebel.


=L. Millsonii= _Rolfe._

Scape 2-2½ ft. long; raceme 6-8 in. long; sep. and pet. ab. 1 in. long,
cream-coloured; lip chocolate-coloured 3-lobed, with 5-9 crenulate
ridges; spur ab. ⅙ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Kagulu).


=L. purpuratus= _Lindl._

Leaves 1-2 ft. long. Scape 3-4 ft. and raceme 9-12 in. long, many
flowered. Sep. and pet. faint-pink, ¾ in. long, petals broader; lip
3-lobed, side lobes purplish brown, front lobe lilac with 2-4 darker
crenulate ridges; spur conical, 1/5 in. long, pink.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshook Ali, Dar Fertit: Biselli, Niamniam-
land); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=L. arenarius= _Lindl._

Leaves 1-1½ ft. long, ½ in. broad, appearing after flowers. Scapes 2-3
ft. high, racemes 4-8 in., 6-10 flowers. Fl. purple with greenish
sepals; sep. ¾-1¼ in. long, lanceolate; pet. same length, broad-
elliptic; lip ab. same length; broadly pandurate 3-lobed, with thickened
crenulate median nerve; spur ab. ⅓ in. long, yellow inside.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=L. Roscheri= _Reichb. f._

Fl. small lilac, probably a small form of above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Bongo: Gafal River).


=L. porphyroglossus= _Reichb. f._

Leaves long petioled, 3½ ft. long, 1¾ in. broad. Scapes tall; racemes 1
ft. long, many-flowered; sep. lanceolate, 1 in. long; pet. suborbicular,
ab. 1 in., pale lilac: lip 3-lobed, 1¼ in. long, purple with 3-5
crenulate ridges; spur ⅓ in. conical.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Hoo River).


=L. Schweinfurthii= _Reichb. f._

Leaves 18 in. or more. Scapes tall, racemes 1 ft., many-flowered; sep.
ovate-oblong, 1 in.; pet. suborbicular, slightly longer; lip
suborbicular, undulate, 1 in. long, with 3, dividing into 5, ridges;
spur ⅓ in. conical, curved.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Tuhami’s Zariba).


=L. orthoplectrus= _Reichb. f._

Scape 2 ft. high; raceme lax many-flowered. Fl. brown, striped with
purple. Sep. triangular; pet. elliptical, ab. ½ in.; lip 3-lobed, front
lobe ligulate, 5-ridged; spur conical, straight, ab. ¼ in.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: north of Uzze River).


=L. Wakefieldii= _Reichb. f._ & _S. Moore._

Leaves 4-5, about 12 in. long. Scapes 2-4 ft. long; raceme ab. 1 ft.,
laxly many-flowered; sep. ovate-oblong, ⅓ in. long, green; pet. broad-
ovate, ¾ in. bright yellow; lip pandurate-oblong, ¾ in. long with
3-yellow ridges, spur conical, ab. ¼ in.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor to Gameiza).


806 =Tridactyle filifolia= _Schlechter._

Epiphyte on rocks or trees. Stems terete, jointed, rugose. Leaves very
few, linear-acicular, acute, about 3½ in. long, glabrous. Flowers white,
with a slender spur ¼ in. long.

Lado: Rocks at Asugi (_Sillitoe_ 146).


807 =Angræcum kotschyanum= _Reichb. f._

Epiphyte, 3-6 leaved. Leaves distichous obovate-oblong 2-5 in. long.
Racemes pendulous 9-15 in. long, many-flowered; sep. elliptic-
lanceolate, ½-1 in.; petals slightly smaller; lip pandurate ½-1 in.
long; spur curved 5-8 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli: near Kamamil); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=A. sp.=

Epiphyte on _Landolphia owariensis_ and other trees; roots very
numerous, straw-coloured, up to about 8 in. long. Leaves oblanceolate, 6
in. long, with about 30 nerves. Flowers not seen.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Chak-Chak & W. of Pongo River).


808 =Corymbis corymbosa= _Thou._

Tall ground orchid; stem leafy. Leaves elliptic-lanceolate, sheathing,
7-9 in. long. Panicles axillary; fl. large white; sep. and pet. narrow
below, somewhat dilated above; lip erect, linear, channelled, apex
recurved.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


809 =Nervilia Kotschyi= _Schlechter._

Terrestrial herb; rhizome tuberiferous. Leaves appearing after flowers,
variable in shape. Fl. racemose; sep and pet. ligulate, greenish; lip
white, oblong-flabellate, trifid at apex.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


810 =Habenaria njamnjamica= _Kränzl._

Terrestrial herb. Leaves 3-4, oblong or lanceolate, ab. 1 in. long,
sheathing. Racemes elongate 7 in. long; bracts ovate, longer than fl.;
dorsal sep., oblong, ¼ in. long, lateral sep. deflexed; pet. bipartite,
lobes linear-falcate; lip 3-partite, ⅓ in. long; spur inflated ⅓ in.
long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=H. armatissima= _Reichb. f._

Tuber large, over 1½ in. long; leaves 2, subopposite, basal ovate-
orbicular, 3-4 in. long, 4-5 in. broad; bracts ovate, acuminate, ¾ in.
long; flowers white.


=H. Bongensium= _Reichb. f._

Ground orchid, growing in grass in moist places, 1 ft. high. Leaves
5-10, ovate-lanceolate, cauline, 1-2½ in. long. Scape 1 ft. high; raceme
6 in. dense; bracts lanceolate, ½ in.; dorsal sep. elliptic, lateral
oblong 3-nerved; pet. 2-partite, one lobe very small; lip 3-partite,
median lobe much longer; spur curved ab. ⅓ in.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, J. Ghattas).


=H. Walleri= _Reichb. f._

Tall ground orchid with brilliant green foliage (Sillitoe), upper leaves
oblong-linear reduced. Racemes with 4 large white fl. on 3-4 in. long
pedicels; bracts ovate, ab. 1½ in. long; dorsal sep. ovate, hooded, ½
in. long, lateral elliptic-oblong, ¾ in.; pet. 2-partite; lip 3-lobed,
side-lobes 1 in. long, front lobes shorter; spurs 3-4 in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=H. cirrhata= _Reichb. f._

Ground orchid with 2 in. long, oblong tuber and 3 in. stem. Leaves 4-5,
suborbicular, 2-3 in. long. Racemes few-flowered; bracts oblong, 2 in.
long; fl. large, white, vanilla-scented; dorsal sep. oblong, ½ in.
lateral deflexed, ¾ in.; pet. 2-partite, posterior lobe linear, 1 in.,
anterior filiform, 3-4 in. long; lip 3-partite, lobes filiform, ab. 1
in. long; spur 5-8 in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas, among bushes).


=H. sp.=

Herb, about 1 ft. high, with two suborbicular leaves at the base. Bracts
large and membranous, about 1½ in. long, venose. Spurs very slender,
about 4 in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River), Sillitoe 140.


811 =Brachycorythis hispidula= _Schltr._

Densely leafy, velvety ground orchid, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves ovate to
ovate-lanceolate decreasing from ab. 1 in. to lanceolate, ½-1 in. long
bracts. Racemes 3-8 in. long; fl. dense white and purple; dorsal sep.
elliptic-oblong, ¼ in., lateral broader, oblique; pet. ovate, ¼ in.
long; lip 3-lobed ⅓ in. long, front lobe shorter, broadly triangular.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River District: Asugi & Ngoi).


=B. Schweinfurthii= _Reichb. f._

Leafy ground orchid, 2-3 ft. high. Leaves 2-3 in. long, imbricate,
cuneate, ligulate. Infl. spicate or racemose, dense, 6 in. long; bracts
linear-lanceolate, about as long as the purple flowers; dorsal sep.
elliptic, lateral axe-shaped; pet. oblong, incurved; lip 3-lobed, side
lobe semi-lunate, front lobe triangular, minute; spur obtuse-angled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: on Steppes).


=B. grandis, var. sudanica= _Braid._

Erect herb, 2 ft. high; leafy from base. Leaves lanceolate, very acute,
2 in. long, ½ in. broad, 3-nerved, glabrous. Flowers pale pink. Spur
very short.

Mongalla Prov. (Lado Dist.: Doka’s).


812 =Bonatea sudanensis= _Rolfe._

Cauline leaves sessile, elliptic-oblong, 2½-4½ in. long, 1¼ in. broad.
Racemes 5-flowered; bracts 3 cm. long. Pedicel and ovary 2 in. long.
Spur 4 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


813 =Platycoryne crocea= _Rolfe._

Slender ground orchid, 1 ft. high. Leaves ab. 7, cauline, lanceolate,
ab. 1 in. long. Racemes 3-4 flowered, short; bracts ovate-oblong, ¼-½
in.; fl. orange-buff; lateral sep. and petals ovate-oblong, 1/5 in.
long; dorsal sep. ovate, hooded; lip 3-lobed, side lobes minute, front
lobe 1/5 in.; spur over ½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: south of the Lessi River).


                                =PALMÆ.=


814 =Phœnix dactylifera= _Linn._ NAKHLA—Arab. The Date Palm.

Cultivated, especially in the Northern parts of the Sudan, for its
fruit, which is called BALAH or TAMR by Arabs.

The timber is used for beams and posts; mats, fans, baskets and ropes
are made from the leaves and crates and baskets from the petioles. The
tree yields a gum which is considered a useful remedy for diarrhœa. A
perfume is obtained by distillation, from the spathes. Date sugar can be
obtained from the juice tapped from the stem, but at the expense of the
fruit crop. (Male DAKAR, female NITAYA, green date DUFFEIG or ROTAB,
leave stalk GEREIDAH, spathe AF, male flowers ARGUN, female ZABATA, seed
NAWA)—Arab.


=P. reclinata= _Jacq._ KINGE—Zande.

Much like a small date palm; stems 3-5 ft. high; leaves 2-5 ft. long,
midrib white-woolly underneath.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Genana & Jur Ghattas, near Tonj & Southern B.
El Ghazal).

Fruit edible, leaves used for hats, mats, etc., and the trunk for
building.


815 =Raphia Monbuttorum= _Drude._ NAKHL EL FARAUN—Arab.

Acaulescent, or stem up to 5 ft. long, densely annulate; leaves in a
terminal crown, large, pinnatisect. Infl. monœcious; spadices branched,
large, pendulous, cylindrical, branches and branchlets compressed, the
latter pectinately arranged; fl. solitary in cup-shaped bracts, male at
base and fem. above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Okale).

The stalks of the leaves, oval in section and 2 in. by 1 in. thick, are
used as carrying poles.


816 =Calamus Barteri= _Becc._

Climbing palm, up to 50 ft. high; stem ab. 1 in. thick. Leaves distant,
equally pinnate, margins, midrib and nerves of leaflets spinosely hairy,
sheaths also spiny. Spadix polygamous diœcious, branched, each branch
bearing 30-40 fl.; bracteoles of male fl. with 2 wing-like keels.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Khor Tela).


=C. sp.?= PODO (the fruit)—Zande.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (South).


817 =Ancistrophyllum Schweinfurthii= _Mann_ & _Wendl._

Climbing palm up to 60 ft. high. Leaves 12-14 ft. long, equally pinnate,
midrib gradually tapering to a whip-like, sometimes spiny tendril, 5-6
ft. long; pet., sheaths and spaces between leaflets spinous. Fl.
hermaphrodite.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Mansilli Brook).


818 =Borassus flabellifer= _Linn._ =var. æthiopum= _Warburg._
DELEIB—Arab; GAGGIAM (the small tree) & DAGGĀT (full grown tree)
(Dilling) GIĀT (J. Ghulfan) & MUNLI (J. Eliri)—Nuba; INJIR—Bari; TUK
(Bahr El Jebel)—Dinka & Jur; DALANZE—Golo; NURR—Nuer; OKWA—Zande.

Tall, erect, usually unbranched palm, up to 60-70 ft. high; stem robust
annulate, thickened above the middle. Leaves fan-shaped, broader than
long, in a terminal crown. Infl. diœcious. Drupe obscurely 3-angled,
smooth, orange-coloured, with a fibrous epicarp.

Southern Sudan.

Almost every part of this palm is put to some use. The fibres from the
leaves and leaf-stalks are used for rope making; the leaves for
thatching; the pericarp of the fruit is edible, and the kernel itself is
eaten when young. The wood is heavy, hard and durable, and is useful for
building, canoes, water-pipes, etc. From the unopen spathes a sap is
drawn which when fresh is sweet and when boiled down yields Date Sugar
or Jaggery, it quickly ferments, and gives a raw spirit called toddy.
The root tip as it emerges from the germinating seed is eaten as a
vegetable.


819 =Hyphæne thebaica= _Mart._ DOM—Arab; ANDO (J. Daier), KARIAI (J.
Eliri) & AMURTE (J. Ghulfan)—Nuba; GORA—Hameg; KEIR & TUNUSHO—Bari; NIAT
(Kaka) & TAAM—Dinka; DAYA & LEL—Nuer; KAYU—Shilluk; TAANG—Burun. The Dom
Palm.

Tree up to 50 ft. high; stems branching dichotomously. Leaves 20-30 in a
terminal crown on each branch, fan-shaped; petiole sheathing at base,
spiny on margins. Fruit 3 in. long, obliquely ovoid, obscurely 3-angled.

Usually near running water, throughout the Sudan; Nubia; Dongola Prov.;
Khartoum Prov.; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; White Nile Prov.

The leaves are made into mats and their fibre is used for rope-making.
The pulp round the seeds is insipid but is eaten. The kernels give a
vegetable ivory. The timber is strong and is used for posts and beams.


820 =Medemia Argun= _P.G. von Württemburg._ DOM—Arab.

Tree with undivided stems and fan-shaped leaves. Fruit ellipsoid, dull
brown, 1 5/6 in. long.

Nubia (Wadi Delah, near Murrat wells in the Great Nubian Desert, between
Korosko & Abu Hamed); Halfa Prov. (Upper reaches of Wadi Gebgaba, Lat.
21° 45′ N. & Long. 33° E.); Kordofan Prov. (20-21° Lat. N.).

The leaves yield a strong fibre.


=M. abiadensis= _Wendl._

Much as above; fruit ellipsoid, bright brown, 1½ in. long. On the White
Nile.


821 =Elæis guineensis= _Jacq._ The Oil Palm.

Erect palm; stem 20-30 ft. high, annulate, bearing remains of old
leaves. Leaves many in a terminal crown, 10-15 ft. long; pet. 4 ft.
long, spiny on margins; leaflets 18 in. or more long. Fruit ovoid,
umbilicate at apex, 1-3 seeded.

White Nile; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Wau).

Introduced. Not cultivated to any extent in the Sudan at present.


                             =PANDANACEÆ.=


822 =Pandanus sp.=

Leaves sword-like, sharply toothed, probably about 4 ft. long, thick and
leathery. Flowers not seen.

Belgian Congo (Niamniam-land: Diagbe River).


                            =ERIOCAULACEÆ.=


823 =Eriocaulon bifistulosum= _Van Heurck_ & _Muell. Arg._

Aquatic herb; stem elongated, densely leafy above. Leaves filiform, 1-3½
in. long. Ped. numerous, 1½-5 in. long, with sheaths, ab. 1 in. long,
obtuse or bifid at apex. Fl. minute, in globose-depressed brownish
monœcious heads, ⅙ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Dar Fertit: Biri River; Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=E. bongense= _Engl._ & _Ruhland._

Stemless aquatic herb. Leaves radical, linear, 1½-3 in. long. Ped. 5-16
to a plant, 3-12 in. long; sheaths 1-3½ in. long, rather loose. Heads
light straw-coloured, subglobose, ab. ⅓ in. diam.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Agaza River near Jur Ghattas; Bongo: at Bulu
near Sabbi).


=E. elegantulum= _Engl._

Stemless aquatic or marsh herb. Leaves 4-10, linear, ⅓-3 in. long. Ped.
2-16, acutely 3-4 angled, 1-8 in. long; sheaths ⅓-3 in. long, inflated.
Heads ab. ⅙ in. diam., globose; male fl. usually central, greyish-white;
fem. brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


                        =CYPERACEÆ (Sedges).[5]=

(_i_) _Empty glumes at base of spikelet 1-2; fertile glumes 1 to many,
distichous; hypogynous bristles or scales 0; infl. umbellate or
capitate; fl. hermaphrodite._

(_a_) _Style 2-branched._


824 =Kyllinga erecta= _Schum._ & _Thonn._

Glabrous herb; rhizome creeping, up to 8 in. long; stems more or less
distant, nodeless. Leaves close to base of stem and up to half its
length, ⅛ in. broad. Head of 1 spike, ¼-⅓ in. diam., ovoid, dense,
golden tinged; bracts 3-4, up to 3 in. long; spikelets with 1 fertile
glume, which is not winged; nut yellow-brown, turning black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei R.).


=K. melanosperma= _Nees._

Glabrous herb; rhizome thick, ½-1½ in. long; stems 20-30 in. long,
3-angled at top. Leaves up to 6 in. long, ⅙ in. broad. Head of 1 spike,
⅓ in. long, ovoid; bracts 3-4, up to 4 in. long; spikelets with 1
fertile, not winged glume; nut black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=K. crassipes= _Boeck._

Rhizome short; stems 4-8 in. long. Leaves up to 9 in. long. Heads of 1-3
spikes, pale brown; bracts 4-5, up to 9 in. long; spikelets with 1
fertile glume, which is not winged, but has sunk red glands.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Atwot District).


=K. pungens= _Link._

Rhizome thick, brown-scaly; stem 8-18 in. long. Leaves under 9 in. long.
Head of 1 spike, subglobose, ¼-⅓ in. diam.; bracts 4-5, 1-4 in. long;
fertile glume 1, not winged; nut black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Matju River).


=K. triceps= _Rottb._

Stems sub-bulbous at base, tufted, 2-12 in. long. Leaves up to 12 in.
long. Heads of usually 3, sometimes 1 spike, white or green, 1/5-⅓ in.
long; bracts 3-4, up to 3 in. long; fertile glume in spikelet 1,
sometimes red gland-dotted; nuts yellow-brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk
Ali’s Zariba & Jur Ghattas).


=K. squamulata= _Vahl._

Root fibrous; stems tufted. Leaves as long as stem. Head green to brown,
globose, usually of 1 spike, ⅓ in. diam.; bracts 3, up to 4 in. long;
spikelets numerous; fertile glume 1 with a toothed winged keel; nuts
dull-brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid & J. Kurbaj);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=K. controversa= _Steud._ =var. subexalata= _C. B. Clarke._

Roots, stems and leaves as above, but sheaths of last much torn. Head
globose of usually 3 spikes; bracts 3-4, up to 6 in. long; spikelets
numerous; fertile glume 1, keel with narrow ciliate wing.

Kordofan Prov. (J. Kurbaj).


=K. polyphylla= _Willd._

Rhizome short, thick; stems 10-20 in. long, 3-angled at top. Leaves up
to ab. 1 ft. long. Head of 1, sometimes 3, orange-green spikes; bracts
5-8, sometimes over 4 in. long; spikes ⅓ in. diam., ovoid; fertile glume
in spikelet 1, wingless; nuts red-brown.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=K. sphærocephala= _Boeck._

Rhizome slender; stems 1 ft. long, slender. Leaves up to 8 in. long.
Head pale cinnamon-coloured, globose, ¼ in. diam.; spike 1; bracts 2-3,
up to 2 in. long; spikelets with 1, 4-ribbed fertile glume; nut yellow-
brown.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=K. pumila= _Mich._

Roots fibrous; stems tufted, 4-18 in. long, slender; sheaths reddish.
Leaves up to ab. 1 ft. long. Head green or greenish-white; spikes 1-3,
middle spike ab. ⅓ in. long; bracts 2-4, 2-6 in. long; spikelets dense;
fertile glume 1, rarely 2, not winged; nut yellow-brown.

Nubia; Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


825 =Pycreus flavescens= _Nees._

Annual; stems 1-12 in. long. Leaves up to 8 in., crowded close to the
base. Spikes 1 or more, loosely umbelled, of 3-12 clustered ebracteolate
spikelets; bracts 2-4, overtopping umbel; spikelets straw-coloured, red-
tinged; fertile glumes 8-36, boat-shaped; nuts whitish, laterally
compressed.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Kordofan Prov. (Rahad); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Main River: Nuer country; Bongo: Addai).


=P. Mundtii= _Nees._ UMTUGG (N. Kordn.)—Arab.

Stems 8-24 in. long, decumbent and rooting at base and clothed with
leaf-sheaths up to ¾ of its length. Leaves 4-10 in. long. Spikes usually
in many-rayed simple umbels, rarely subcompound or 1 spike only, bearing
3-8 ebracteolate spikelets; bracts 4 to many, overtopping the umbel;
spikelets containing 12-16 fertile glumes, brown; nuts biconvex, dotted.

Khartoum Prov.; North Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra:
Kallokitting 4,000 ft.); Upper White Nile Prov. (mouth of Sobat River &
Khor Attar); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (mouth of Bahr El Arab); Bahr El Jebel
(Sudd).


=P. nitens= _Nees._

Annual; stems tufted up to 12 in. long. Leaves ab. same length. Umbels
simple; spikes 1-6; bracts 3-6, ½-6 in. long; spikelets straw-coloured,
5-30 per spike; fertile glumes 8-44, boat-shaped; nuts pale-brown,
laterally compressed.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad).


=P. polystachyos= _P. Beauv._

Roots fibrous; stems tufted, 12-30 in. long. Leaves basal, up to length
of stem. Umbels usually compound of 1-7 rays; spikes of 10-50
ebracteolate spikelets; bracts 3-6, 4-12 in. long; fertile glumes in
spikelet 20-50; straw-coloured or reddish; nut brown.

=var. laxiflora= _Benth._

Spikes open, subcorymbose or umbellate; spikelets subsolitary.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=P. globosus= _Reichb._ =var. nilagirica= _C. B. Clarke._

Annual or biennial; stems tufted, 1-2 ft. long. Leaves up to 16 in.
long. Umbels 1-6 in. diam., simple or compound or 1 compound head,
bracts 3-5, lowest overtopping inflorescence; spikelets up to ¾ in.
long, compressed, dark-brown; fertile glumes 8-30; nuts blackish.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei R.).


=P. propinquus= _Nees._

Stems and leaves 12-18 in. long. Spikes 10-16 in 1 compound, pale-yellow
head; bracts 3, 3-7 in. long; spikelets ½ in. long; fertile glumes
20-36, slightly inflated; nuts red-brown.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=P. capillifolius= _C. B. Clarke._

Annual; stems tufted, very slender, 4-8 in. long. Leaves same length,
almost hair-like. Head 1, lateral, of 4-18 ebracteolate spikelets which
are ½-¾ in. long and have 10-30 fertile, pale-yellow inflated glumes;
bracts 2, 1-2½ in. long; nut black, smooth, half the length of glume.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=P. elegantulus= _C. B. Clarke._

Annual; stems 8-28 in. long. Leaves ⅔ length of stem, narrow. Umbel of
1-7 dense, compound spikes, each of 5-30 dense spikelets or by
congestion forming a mass of 80 spikelets or more; bracts 3-5, 3-9 in.
long; spikelets up to ⅔ in. long, ebracteolate, 6-16 fld.; glumes not
overlapping in fruit, dark-brown with green keel; nut obovoid, ab. ½
length of glume; style short.

Between Khartoum & Shendi.


=P. umbrosus= _Nees._

Rhizome woody, giving out suckers 12 in. long or more, clothed with
dark-brown scales; stems 12-18 in. long. Leaves ⅙ in. broad, longer than
stem; sheaths fleshy, with transverse lines. Umbels subsimple, rays 3-7,
up to 2 in. long; bracts 4, lowest 6 in. long; spikes of 3-8
ebracteolate spikelets; spikelets 16-fld., brown to black, keels
yellowish-brown or green; style shorter than nut, which is ¼ length of
glume, dark-brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main river: Nuer villages).


=P. albomarginatus= _Nees._

Annual; stem solitary, 1-3 ft. high, 3-angled at top. Leaves ⅔ length of
stem, ab. ¼ in. broad. Umbel usually compound; primary rays 3-11, 1-7
in. long; bracts 3-6, lowest 8-18 in. long. Spikes subglobose or
elongate, 1¼-2 in. long, of 8-12 usually ebracteolate spikelets;
spikelets straw-coloured, 18-30 fld.; glumes with white margins; nut
black, ⅔ length of glume.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


826 =Juncellus alopecuroides= _C. B. Clarke._ SEID & SAMAR BALADI
(Egypt)—Arab.

Large herb; stem solitary, 18-36 in. long, 3-angled at top. Leaves
length of stem, ⅓ in. broad. Umbel 6 in. and more in diam., compound;
rays 4-10; bracts 3-8, lowest 6 in. and more long; spikes 3-5 together,
sessile, 1-1½ in. long, dense; spikelets 8-30 fld.; compressed, straw-
coloured; glumes closely imbricate; nut ⅓ length of glume, anterior
angle flattened.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Kallokitting 4,200
ft.); Upper White Nile Prov. (Mouth of Bahr El Zeraf).

Cultivated in Lower Egypt for its stems which are made into mats, also
for sweetening land about to be reclaimed.


=J. pustulatus= _C. B. Clarke._

Annual; stems tufted, 4-16 in. long. Leaves few, ab. ⅔ length of stem,
narrow. Umbels simple, rays 1-5, 0-2½ in. long; bracts 3, lowest 3-7 in.
long. Spikes of 2-5 subsessile spikelets, ebracteolate; spikelets white,
purple-marked, up to ½ in. long; rhachilla persistent; flowering glumes
8-18; nut 2/5 length of glume, much flattened on anterior angle.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=J. pygmæus= _C. B. Clarke._

Annual; stems densely tufted, 1-10 in. high. Leaves as long, narrow.
Infl. a dense compound head of numerous spikelets; bracts 3-8, dilated
at base, lowest up to 3-6 in. long; spikelets green to pale-brown, 1/5
in. long, compressed, 8-24. fld.; glumes deciduous from lowest,
rhachilla persistent; nut ab. ⅓ length of glume, plano-convex, brown,
smooth.

Dongola Prov. (banks of the Nile); Khartoum Prov. (North); Blue Nile
Prov.; White Nile & Kordofan Provinces.


=J. lævigatus= _C. B. Clarke._

Rhizome woody; stems crowded or distant, 6-24 in. long, bases enclosed
by red-brown scales. Leaves variable, usually short. Spike solitary,
lateral, of 1-30 spikelets; bracts 2, lowest continuing the stem, 1-3
in. long; spikelets ⅓ in. long, straw-coloured, 12-24. fld.; nut ab. ⅔
length of glume, plano-convex; rhachilla persistent.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat & 21° N.L.); Darfur Prov. (J. Meidob, 2,400
ft.).


827 =Cyperus nudicaulis= _Poir._

Floating herb; rhizome long; stems tufted, 12-30 in. long. Leaves
reduced to pale-brown leaf-sheaths. Head of 1-12 sessile spikelets;
bracts 1-3, the lowest suberect, continuing the stem, shorter than head;
spikelets ½-1 in. long, flattened, 30-70 fld., pale or reddish; glumes
3-nerved, falling off seriatim from lowest from persistent rhachilla;
sta. 3; style long, branches short; nut ⅔ length of glume, flattened,
base corky, thickened.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Sudd); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main
river).


=C. Colymbetes= _Kotschy_ & _Peyr._

Stems tufted, 1-2 ft. long, 3-angled. Leaves 0. Head of 6-30 spikelets;
bracts 2; spikelets ½-⅔ in. long, up to 40 fld., otherwise as above.

Fung Prov. (Saoleil & Sherif); Mouth of Bahr El Jebel.


=C. leucocephalus= _Retz._

Glabrous herb; stems bulbous at base, 4-10 in. long, tufted. Leaves up
to ⅔ length of stem. Head 1 globose, white or pale brown, up to ⅔ in.
diam., of 6-40 spikelets; bracts 3, lowest 2 in. long; spikelets up to ⅓
in. long, compressed; glumes 1-3 nerved close; sta. 1; style shorter
than nut which is ⅓-⅔ length of glume, yellow, bluntly 3-angled.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.).


=C. compactus= _Lam._ ’ESHŪB, SE’ED—Arab.

Perennial; rhizome short; stem 4-16 in. long, with hard, dark brown
leaf-sheaths at base. Leaves up to length of stem. Head 1 of 5-20
spikelets, ½-1½ in. diam., yellowish; bracts 3-4, dilated at base,
lowest 2-4 in. long; spikelets ⅓-⅔ in., oblong, compressed, 8-18 fld.;
glumes ab. ¼ in. long, close, striate; nut ⅓ length of glume, 3-angled;
style shorter than nut.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Abu Gurun’s
Zariba).


=C. conglomeratus= _Rottb._

Glabrous herb; rhizome usually short; roots woolly; stems 4-24 in. long,
somewhat 3-angled at top. Leaves half to twice as long as stem. Simple
umbel or head of few spikes; bracts 3-5, lowest 3-6 in. long, suberect,
dilated at base; spikelets 3-25 to a head, ab. ½ in. long, 8-16 fld.,
straw-coloured or pale brown; glumes minutely mucronate, ribbed; style
short, branches rather long; nut ⅓ length of glume, 3-angled.

Nubian Desert (Wadi El Derood); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma);
Darfur Prov.


=C. cruentus= _Rottb._ TOROG—Hadendowa; ASHAM—Rashida.

Spikelets narrower and glumes closer on rhachilla, but otherwise as
above.

Nubia (between Suakin & Berber: Obak); Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov.
(Atbara, near Bulak); Kassala Prov. (Gash Delta: Um Adam); Red Sea Prov.
(Er-Rih Island, Red Sea); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad).


=C. amabilis= _Vahl._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted, 2-8 in. long. Leaves up to ½ length of
stem. Umbel simple or compound (rarely 1 head), rays up to 14 and 4 in.
long; bracts up to 4, shorter than umbel. Spikelets 3-10 together, ⅔ in
long, golden-brown, 16-36 fld.; glumes minutely mucronate, keel of 3-5
green nerves; style as long as nut; nut 2/5 length of glume, obovoid,
brown.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur: Jur Ghattas, Bongo-land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. uncinatus= _Poir._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted, 2-10 in. long. Leaves length of stem,
bristly. Umbels usually simple; bracts 3-6, bristly, longer than umbel;
spikelets digitate, usually 3-10 together, ½ in. long, 8-28 fld.,
compressed, pale-rusty to brown; glumes 3-nerved, the green keel
produced into a prominent bristle; nut half as long as glume (excl.
mucro), oblong-obovoid.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur-land); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=C. reduncus= _Hochst._

Glabrous herb; stems tufted, 2-10 in. long. Leaves length of stem. Umbel
usually compound, 3-4 in. diam.; bracts longer than umbel. Spikes
digitate, of 3-20 spikelets, which are flattened and 30 fld.; glumes
with short recurved mucro; style short, as are the branches; nut ab. ¾
in. length of glume, narrow, brown.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).


=C. difformis= _Linn._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted, 4-20 in. long, 3-angled at top. Leaves
½-⅔ length of stem. Spikes in simple or compound umbel or contracted
into 1 head; bracts 2-4, lowest 2-10 in. long. Spikelets many in dense
heads, dusky or brown, 10-30 fld.; glumes close packed, obtuse; sta. 1
(rarely 2); style much shorter than nut, branches short: nut nearly as
long as glume, 3-angled, straw-coloured to brown.

Kordofan Prov. (Rahad); Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,300 ft.); Bahr El Jebel
(Madi); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas; Niamniam-land: Linduku
River).


=C. microlepis= _Boeck._

Spikelets whitish; glumes more elongate and less obtuse, and nut more
elongate and narrower than in above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gir; Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. dichroostachyus= _Hochst._

Glabrous herb; rhizome 4-8 in. long; stems distant, 18-36 in. long,
sharply 3-angled at top. Leaves ½-¾ length of stem, up to ½ in. broad.
Umbel lateral, compound, 2-5 in. diam.; bracts 3-4, up to 8 in. long,
lowest in continuation of stem. Spikes of 3-5 spikelets, digitate,
numerous; spikelets white, brown spotted, 6-14 fld.; glumes 1-nerved,
obtuse; sta. 2; style very short; nut ¾ length of glume, yellow-brown.

North Kordofan Prov.; Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


=C. Haspan= _Linn._

Glabrous herb; rhizome creeping; stems distant or close together, 4-28
in. long, 3-angled or winged at top. Leaves almost absent to longer than
stem. Umbel usually compound once or more, rarely simple; bracts 2-3,
lowest suberect, shorter to longer than the umbel. Spikelets digitate,
2-6 together, up to ½ in. long, compressed, 10-40 fld.; glumes 1-3
nerved, greenish or purplish; sta. 2-3; style short; nut ab. ½ length of
glume, pale-brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. Yei River).


=C. flavidus= _Retz._

Short-lived annual; stems tufted, 2-8 in. long, obtusely 3-angled.
Leaves longer than stem. Umbel very compound, yellow to blackish; bracts
longer than umbel; sta. 1; nut white; otherwise as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. podocarpus= _Boeck._

Glabrous herb; rhizome scaly; stems tufted, obtusely 3-angled, 10 in.
long. Leaves ⅔ length of stem. Umbel simple; rays 2-4, ab. ½ in. long;
bracts 3, lowest suberect, 4-8 in. long. Spikes of 3-7 spikelets,
ebracteate; spikelets 2/5 in. long, 8-12 fld., purple mottled; glumes
obtuse; sta. 3; style shorter than nut, which is ½ length of glume,
broad ellipsoid, 3-angled, suddenly narrowed into a minute stalk, black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. sphærospermus= _Schrad._

Glabrous herb; rhizome woody, 2 in. long; stems 6-14 in. long, more or
less sharply 3-angled at top. Leaves from ½ the length to (rarely) more
than length of stems. Umbel simple or compound, 1-5 in. diam.; bracts
varying from 1 in. to length in infl. Spikes of 3-8 digitate spikelets,
straw-coloured or rich brown; spikelets ½ in. long, compressed, 10-30
fld.; sta. 3; style short, branches longer than the minute nut.

Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


=C. flabelliformis= _Rottb._

Rhizome stout; stems 2-3 ft. long, tufted, rounded or angular at top.
Leaves 0, except on early sterile shoots. Umbel usually compound, 4-12
in. diam.; primary rays 6 to numerous, subequal; bracts 8-12 subequal,
longer than umbel; spikes whitish-yellow to rusty, of 2-15 digitate
spikelets which are compressed and 10-20 fld.; glumes hard, shining,
pointed; sta. 3; style short, branches long; nut ½ length of glume.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=C. dichromenæformis= _Kunth._ =var. major= _Boeck._

Rhizome woody; stems 12-30 in. long, almost flattened at top. Leaves
nearly as long, up to ½ in. broad. Head of 12-34 spikelets; bracts 4-5,
lowest up to 10 in. long; spikelets ½ in. long, flattened, straw-
coloured, 12-20 fld.; glumes distant; sta. 3; styles shorter than nut,
branches long; nut ⅔ length of glume, 3-angled, brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Kulenjo).


=C. Renschii= _Boeck._

Tall glabrous herb; stems up to 6 ft. high, 3-angled to 3-winged at top.
Leaves up to 4 ft. by 1 in., 3-nerved. Umbel 8-24 in. diam., decompound;
bracts 2 ft. long. Spikes abundant, green to red-brown, small, of 2-7
clustered spikelets which are 1/12 in. long, oblong, 3-6 fld.; glumes
distichous, mucronate; sta. 2-3; style half the length and branches
length of the nut which is ab. ½ length of glume.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. Iria= _Linn._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted, 4-20 in. long. Leaves ab. as long as
stem. Umbel usually compound, 2-20 in. diam.; rays often long; bracts
longer than umbel. Spikes of 5-20 spikelets loosely spicate on a ⅓-2 in.
long rhachis; spikelets slender, ab. ½ in. long, yellow or brown, 6-20
fld.; nut nearly length of glume, black; style short, branches shortly
exserted.

Nubia; Kordofan Prov. (Obeid); Darfur Prov. (J. Barkin); Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=C. aristatus= _Rottb._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted, 1-7 in. long. Leaves up to length of
stem. Umbel appearing simple (or 1 spike); rays 1-6, up to 3 in. long,
lowest bract usually longer than umbel. Spikes ½ in. long, cylindric, of
5-40 spikelets, brown when ripe; spikelets up to ½ in. long, compressed,
6-30 fld.; glumes striate, ending in a conspicuous recurved bristle;
sta. 1; nut ⅓ length of glume, brown; style shorter than nut, branches
shortly exserted.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad); Upper White Nile Prov. (Taufikia); Bahr El
Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=C. distans= _Linn. f._

Glabrous herb; rhizome stout; stems 1-3 ft. long. Leaves up to length of
stem. Umbel compound, 8-12 in. diam., sometimes congested or scanty;
bracts usually longer than umbel. Rhachis of spike ⅓-2 in. long;
spikelets spicate, almost acicular, 10-12 fld., reddish; glumes distant;
style shorter than nut, branches shortly exserted; nut ab. ½ length of
glume, black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nabambisso River, Jur: Jur
Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. eleusinoides= _Kunth._

Stems 1-3 ft. long, throwing out lateral shoots at base. Spikes 1 in.
long dense cylindric; spikelets obliquely spreading, green or grey-
brown, ½ in. long, ab. 10 fld.; glumes mucronate, approximate; otherwise
as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=C. latifolius= _Poir._

Glabrous herb; stolons (runners) long; stem 2-3 ft. long, acutely
3-angled at top. Leaves ¾ length of stem, ¾ in. broad. Umbel compound,
dense, secondary umbels corymbose; bracts longer than umbel. Spikes of
4-8 spikelets: spikelets ½ in. long, pallid or reddish, 8-16 fld.;
glumes obtuse, imbricated; nut ½ length of glume, black.

Bahr El Jebel (Hillet El Nuer).


=C. pilosus= _Vahl._

Glabrous, except spike-rhachis which is minutely hairy; stem 12-30 in.
long, acutely 3-angled at top. Leaves ¾ length of stem. Umbel usually
compound; bracts several, lowest longer than umbel. Spikelets ½ in. long
at right angles to the rhachis, pale reddish, 10-24 fld.; glumes obtuse,
rather loose; nut 3/5 length of glume, black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. bulbosus= _Vahl._

Glabrous bulbed herb; stolons slender, ending in small bulb; stem 4-12
in. long, very slender. Leaves longer than stem, tapering. Umbel
contracted, subcorymbose; bracts 3-6 overtopping umbel. Spikelets 4-6 to
the spike, compressed, red; rhachilla winged; flowering glumes 8-26,
obtuse, striate; nut ½ length of glume, black; style short, branches
long.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Wadi El Omari & Khor Tamanib).

The roots are used as flour in times of scarcity and eaten roasted or
boiled.


=C. microbolbos= _C. B. Clarke._

Bulbed glabrous herb; stems 3 in. high, slender; stolons capillary,
ending in minute bulbs. Leaves 6 in. long. Spikes 1 or 2 together, ped.
¼ in. long; bracts 2, longer than spike. Spikelets 3-5 per spike, ½ in.
long, compressed red-brown, 24 fld.; glumes green-mucronate; sta. 3;
style length of nut, branches long; nut ½ length of glume, brown.

Red Sea Prov. (coast-land to between 3,000-4,000 ft., Suakin).


=C. esculentus= _Linn._ SAAD—Arab.

Bulbed herb; stolons slender, ending in bulbs ½ in. diam., ringed by
transverse lines; stems 6-24 in. long, 3-angled at top. Leaves up to ¾
length of stem. Umbel more or less compound, 3-12 in. diam.; bracts 3-5,
ab. as long as umbel. Spikes of 4-30 spikelets which are ¼-¾ in. long,
pale yellow to brown, 6-30 fld., rhachilla winged; glumes blunt,
striate; style shorter than nut, branches long; nut ab. ½ length of
glume.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Kulme 3,600 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. articulatus= _Linn._

Glabrous herb, stolons hardening into long rhizomes; stems 3-6 ft. high,
when dry showing joints ½-1½ in. apart. Leaves reduced to sheaths. Umbel
usually compound, 1-8 in. diam.; bracts elliptic-lanceolate. Spikelets
3-4 to spike, or more by congestion of spikes into one, ⅓-1 in. long,
12-50 fld., straw-coloured to brown; glumes obtuse; style branches long;
nut 3/5 length of glume, black.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Jebel.


=C. schimperianus= _Steud._ DIS & SID—Arab.

Glabrous herb; rhizome woody; stems 1-3 ft. long. Leaves under ⅓ length
of stem. Umbel usually compound, 3-10 in. diam.; bracts 4-7. Spikes of
3-20 loosely arranged, often drooping, 12-24 fld. spikelets, which are
½-¾ in. long, compressed, red-brown; rhachilla winged, wings deciduous;
glumes distant, obtuse; style branches long; nut ½ length of glume.

Nubia; Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov. (Atbara: Shallalat); Khartoum Prov.
(Nile near J. Royan); Fung Prov.


=C. nubicus= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous herb; stolons hardening into rhizomes; stems up to 2 ft. long,
3-angled at top. Leaves 12 in. by ¼ in. Umbel compound, 5-8 in. diam.
Spikelets numerous, rusty-red, up to 1 in. long, 20-30 fld., compressed;
rhachilla wings ovate, deciduous; glumes acute, distant; style short,
branches long; nut 2/5 length of glume, black. Bracts 3-4, longer than
umbel.

Red Sea Prov. (21° N.L.).


=C. schweinfurthianus= _Boeck._

Tall scabrous herb; stems 1-3 fl. long, 3-angled. Leaves ½-⅔ length of
stem. Umbel irregular, simple or compound primary rays up to 12 in.
long; bracts few to many, according to number of rays equalling or
overtopping the umbel. Spikes loose; spikelets 3-9 per spike, 1 in.
long, 20 fld., straw-coloured, compressed; wings of rhachilla oblong,
deciduous; glumes distant, apiculate; style short, branches long; nut ½
length of glume, black.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=C. elatior= _Boeck._

Stem 30 in. high, stout, smooth. Umbel compound; rays up to 10 in. high;
spikelets 1 in. long, 20-30 fld., suberect, otherwise as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. gracilinux= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous herb; stems 2 ft. high, 3-angled at top; stolons numerous.
Leaves up to 16 in. long. Umbel compound, 6-12 in. diam.; bracts
overtopping umbel. Spikes loose with 5-11 spikelets, which are ⅔ in.
long, compressed, 10-16 fld., whitish; wings of rhachilla elliptic-
lanceolate; glumes subobtuse, close; nut 3/5 length of glume.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=C. maculatus= _Boeck._ SEID—Arab.

Glabrous herb; stems 12-20 in. long, 3-angled at top, bulbous at base.
Leaves nearly length of stem. Umbel compound, of 5-11 spikelets, which
are ½ in. long, compressed, 20 fld., straw-coloured, usually purple-
spotted; rhachilla wings narrow; glumes obtuse, close; styles shorter
than nut, branches exserted.

Nubia; Berber Prov. (Mograt Island near Abu Hamad); Khartoum Prov.;
White Nile Prov. (Khor Attar).


=C. rotundus= _Linn._

Glabrous herb; stems 8-24 in. long, bulbous at base, 3-angled at top.
Leaves ⅔ length of stem. Umbel simple or compound, 1-8 in. diam.; rays
long or short; bracts 3-4, overtopping umbel. Spikes loose; spikelets
red-brown, ⅔ in. long and 8-30 fld., or 2 in. long and 50-60 fld.;
rhachilla wings joining the pointed, closely placed glumes; style
shorter than nut, branches long; nut ½ length of glume, dark brown.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Suakin, Wadi El Omari, Wadi El Arab); Kassala
Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Berber Prov. (Ben Naga, between Berber &
Khartoum); Khartoum Prov. (North); Banks of the Blue Nile (Bunzaga);
Kordofan Prov. (Obeid, Abu Haraza); White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).

Used in certain dye preparations to impart perfume to the fabric. The
rhizomes yield an essential oil which is used as a perfume. The fresh
roots are diaphoretic and astringent; they are used for indigestion in
children and in fevers.

=var. spadiceus= _Boeck._

Stem usually tall, scabrous at top. Spikelets strongly compressed,
sometimes darker brown, shining.

Kordofan Prov.


=C. nuerensis= _Boeck._

Glabrous herb; stolons hardening into rhizome, 8 in. long; stems 8-20
in. long, 3-angled at top. Leaves ⅔ length of stem, ⅓ in. broad. Umbel
compound, 6-8 in. diam. (sometimes reduced to a head); primary rays 3-7;
bracts 3-5, 2-6 in. broad; bracts 3-5 overtopping umbel. Spikes loose
overtopping umbel. Spikes of 3-5 red-brown to nearly black spikelets,
which are 2/5 in. long by 1/12 in., 8-16 fld.; wings of rhachilla ovate-
lanceolate; glumes obtuse, reddish-black on sides and 5-nerved, yellow-
green on back; otherwise as above sp.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (near Nuer villages).


=C. Fenzelianus= _Steud._

Tall herb; stolons long, thick. Umbel open. Spikelets pale to dusky
straw-coloured; otherwise as _C. rotundus_.

Nubia; Berber Prov. (Zeidab); Between Berber & Khartoum: Khartoum Prov.;
Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (J. Kuhn).


=C. radiatus= _Vahl._

Glabrous herb; rhizome 0; lateral shoots at base of stem; stem 6-24 in.
long. Leaves ⅔ length of stem. Umbel up to 6-10 in. diam., but often
contracted, sometimes into 1 dense head; bracts overtopping infl. Spikes
digitate, 1 in. by ab. ½ in., almost sessile; spikelets 1/5-2/5 in.
long, narrow, 10-36 fld., compressed, pale to brownish; wings of
rhachilla oblong, persistent; glumes apiculate tightly imbricate; sta.
3; nut ½ length of glume; style ½ length of nut, branches short.

Nubia; Dongola; Fung Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur:
Jur Ghattas & Wau River; Bongo: Addai).


=C. exaltatus= _Retz._

Stems up to 3-4 ft. high. Some spikes peduncled; spikelets larger, less
crowded and more yellowish or reddish, but otherwise as above.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Harun; Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.
(Sagattur); Upper White Nile Prov. (Tonga Island); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba).

=var. dives= _C. B. Clarke._

Umbel rigid. Spikes rigid, dense; ripe spikelets divaricate or reflexed,
hard, often shining and yellowish.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land:
Nabambisso River).


=C. Pethericki= _C. B. Clarke._

Very tall, stout herb. Umbel large, compound with large cylindric
spikes; lowest bract very long, ⅔ in. broad. Spikelets nearly ½ in.
long, 36 fld., pale yellowish-brown; glumes thin; otherwise as _C.
exaltatus_.

Mongalla Prov. (Gigging, Mongalla & 7° 25′ N.L.).


=C. digitatus= _Roxb._

Glabrous herb; stem 2-6 ft. high, 3-angled at top. Leaves ⅔ length of
stem. Umbel compound, 8-24 in. diam.; lowest bract longer than umbel.
Spike 2 by 1 in.; spikelets many, at right angles to spike, ab. ½ in.
long, narrow, 20 fld., yellowish-brown; wings of rhachilla caducous,
lanceolate, yellow; glumes scarcely mucronate, yellow and brown; sta.
3.; nut ½ length of glume, black; style shorter than nut. Bahr El Ghazal
Prov. (Niamniam-land).


=C. auricomus= _Sieber._

Stem at top almost 3-winged; umbel not very large; otherwise as above.

Blue Nile Prov. (Khor Agalin at Doleib); Kordofan Prov. (Birket Kolli);
Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Ghaba Shambé; Bongo: Addai); Mongalla Prov.
(Kenissa).

=var. minor= _C. B. Clarke._

Slender; umbels small; spikelets slender, red-brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=C. Papyrus= _Linn._ =var. Antiquorum= _C. B. Clarke._ BURDI, DIS &
BABIRUSA—Arab; BODUMOH—Zande; YELL—Nuer. The Papyrus Plant.

Plant up to 15 ft. high; rhizome woody; stems smooth with basal sheaths
only. Leaves up to 1 in. by ⅓ in. on barren shoots. Umbels compound, up
to 3 ft. diam.; primary rays up 30, up to 1 ft. long; bracts up to 7 in.
long, reddish. Spikelets numerous sessile, ovate, ¼-⅓ in. long,
compressed; bracts of secondary umbel 3, green, up to 2½ in. long.
Spikes ab. 1 in. by ½ in. with 12-30 spreading spikelets; spikelets ⅓
long, brown; glumes ovate-oblong with a green median line; rhachilla
wings yellow deciduous late; sta. 3; style length of nut; branches
rather short; nut ½-3/5 length of glume, black.

White Nile and affluents; Bahr El Ghazal and affluents.

The slices of the stem, pressed together, were used by the ancient
Egyptians as a writing material. Attempts have been made of recent years
to utilise the plant for paper making and for fuel.


=C. cephalotes= _Vahl._

Stolons slender; stem 6-10 in. long, 3-angled. Leaves longer or shorter
than stem. Head globose, ½ diam.; bracts 3-4; spikelets numerous,
sessile, ovate, ¼-⅓ in. long, compressed, 20-30 fld.; rhachilla not
winged; glumes cuspidate, imbricate, red-brown; sta. 2-3; nut oblong,
narrowed into a long beak, style jointed on beak of nut, slender, entire
or 2-3 toothed.

Bahr El Jebel (Sudd).


828 =Mariscus[6] coloratus= _Nees._ =var. macrocephala= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous herb; stolons 0; stems 6-14 in. long, 3-angled at top,
thickened at base by brownish leaf sheaths. Leaves up to length of stem,
weak. Spikes 5-6, large, in one head; bracts 3-4, spreading, lowest 3-7
in. long; spikelets ovate or lanc., acute, 2-6 fld., straw-coloured;
glumes subacute, 13-15 ribbed, margins running into the elliptic wings
of rhachilla; style shorter than nut, branches longish; nut ½ length of
glume, black; sta. 2-3.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Makporru Hill); Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River).


=M. djurensis= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous herb; stolons numerous, 1-2 in. long, red-scaly; stems
approximate, 4-12 in. long, slender, 3-angled at top. Leaves up to
length of stem, weak. Head 1, ovoid, ⅓ in. diam., whitish; bracts 4, up
to 6 in. long. Spikelets 1/5 in. long, 2-6 fld.; glumes distant, ovate,
11-13 ribbed, with small red glands; nut ½-2/5 length of glume, black;
style ab. same length.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas; Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=M. macropus= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous herb; stems 10-20 in. long, 3-angled at top, much thickened at
base by fibrous remnants of sheaths, tufted. Leaves ½-⅔ length of stems,
long-bristly at tips. Head 1, ovoid, ½ in. diam., dirty-white; bracts 3,
lowest 1-2 in. long. Spikelets 1/5 in. long, 8-10 fld., producing 6-8
nuts; glumes obscurely 7-11 ribbed; nut ½-⅔ length of glume; style same
length.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba & Jur Ghattas).


=M. leptophyllus= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous herb; stems approximate, thickened at base by withering leaf-
sheaths, 3-angled at top. Leaves ⅔ length of stem, weak. Infl.
umbellate; rays 2-3, ¼-1½ in. long, each with 1-3 spikes; bracts 4, up
to 6 in. long. Spikelets ⅓ in. long, white to brown, ripening 6-8 nuts;
glumes obtuse, 7-ribbed, distant; nut ½-⅔ length of glume, brown; style
shorter, branches exserted.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib).


=M. mollipes= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous herb; stems thickened at base by fibrous torn leaf-sheaths,
3-angled at top, 4-6 in. long. Leaves ⅔ length of stem. Head of 1 spike,
ovoid, pale straw-coloured; bracts 3-4, lowest up to 3 in. long.
Spikelets ⅛ in. long, ripening 1 nut only; glumes ovate, acuminate,
obscurely 5-7 ribbed; nut line.-obl., ½ length of glume, black; style
shorter; branches long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Mayob).


=M. Sieberianus= _Nees._

Glabrous herb; stems 12-30 in. long, 3-angled at top, thickened at base
by green to red leaf-sheaths, approximate. Leaves up to ⅔ length of
stem. Umbel simple, 1-5 in. diam.; rays 5-12 up to 4 in. long; bracts
5-10, lowest up to 8 in. long. Spikes solitary, ab. 1 in. by ¼ in.,
cylindric; bracts to spike 0; spikelets numerous, spreading or deflexed
below, lin.-lanc., bearing 1 or 2 nuts; lowest flower-glume twice as
long as upper empty glume, ovate-ob., obtuse, 7-11 ribbed; style ½
length of nut; branches length of nut; nut ⅔ length of glume.

Mongalla Prov. (Lado District & Bor).


=M. umbellatus= _Vahl._

Some of rays of umbel many times longer than spikes, which are ½ by ⅙
in.; spikelets small, denser and more rigid than in above sp. and in
fruit all strongly deflexed; nut almost ellipsoid; otherwise as above.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).

The rhizomes are edible.


=M. sublimis= _C. B. Clarke._

Umbel simple; rays 7-10, up to 2½ in. long. Spikes up to ¾ by ¼ in.,
dense, pale grey; ripe spikelets appressed, obliquely erect. Nut 1 only
per spikelet, ellipsoid; otherwise as _M. Sieberianus_.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=M. macrocarpus= _Kunth._

Spikes ovoid, ab. ½ in. wide, subsessile or shortly peduncled. Ripe
spikelets with 2-3 nuts; lowest empty glume mucronate. Nut ¾ length of
glume, broadly oblong; otherwise as large forms of _M. Sieberianus_.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


(_ii_) _Empty glumes at base of spikelet 0-2; fertile glumes usually
numerous, spirally arranged with few exceptions (nearly distichous in
some spp. of Fimbristylis); hypogynous scales or bristles 0-7; infl.
umbellate or capitate; fl. hermaphrodite; stem naked (except Fuirena)._


829 =Eleocharis fistulosa= _Schultes._

Glabrous herb; stolons long; stems 1-3 ft. long, sharply 3-angled at
top, leafless. Infl. of 1 terminal spikelet, 1-1¼ by 1/6-1/5 in., straw-
coloured to brown; fertile glumes numerous, obovate, obtuse; sta. 1-3;
hypogynous bristles 6, as long as nut, retrorse, rusty-red; style
2-3-fid, base enlarged, distinct from nut which is ½ length of glume,
straw-coloured, marked like a grill (_cancellate_).

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=E. atropurpurea= _Kunth._

Leafless glabrous annual; stems tufted, 2-6 in. long, slender. Spikelet
1, ovoid, ⅛-¼ in. long, many-fld., greenish-red; glumes obtuse,
caducous; hypog. bristles 7, white, ½-¾ length of nut, retrorse,
sometimes short or reduced to a minute cup; style branches 2, ½-⅔ length
of glume, black.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol).


=E. chætaria= _Roem._ & _Schultes._

Glabrous leafless herb; stems tufted 1-6 in. long. Spikelets 1-2, ⅛-⅙
in. long, ovoid, pallid or reddish, maturing 1-5 nuts; hypog. bristles
6, retrorse, length of nut, sometimes fewer; sta. 2-3; styles 3-fid; nut
obovoid white, cancellate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=E. complanata= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous leafless annual; stems tufted, 6-9 in. long, flattened.
Spikelet ab. ⅙ in. long, cylindric, green marked with red, densely fld.;
glumes obtuse; hypog. bristles 0; style 3-fid; nut ½ length of glume,
white; style base bulbous, small.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land: Gir).


=E. microcarpa= _Torrey._

Glabrous leafless annual; stems tufted, 4-8 in. long.—Spikelet ⅙-¼ in.
long, 10-20 fld., pale brown-green; glumes obtuse; hypog. bristles 3-5,
⅓-⅔ length of nut, retrorse, white; style 3-fid; nut hardly ½ length of
glume, brownish.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


830 =Fimbristylis squarrosa= _Vahl._

Annual; stems tufted, 2-7 in. long. Leaves ½-¾ length of stem. Umbel
usually compound, sometimes reduced to 2 spikelets to a stem; bracts 3-4
ab. as long as umbel; spikelets solitary up to ¼ by 1/12 in.; fl. dense,
straw-coloured; glumes 3-5 nerved ending in recurved bristle; sta.
usually 2, style 2-fid, hairy below bifurcation and round base of style;
hypog. bristles 0 in this genus; nut ½ length of glume, biconvex.

White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Majob & Wau).


=F. dichotoma= _Vahl._

Pubescent or puberulous annual; stems tufted, 2-10 in. long. Leaves
length of stem. Umbel compound; bracts 3-4 as long as umbel. Spikelets
many, solitary, ¼ in. long, obscurely polygonal; fertile glumes in many
spirals, rust-coloured, ovate acute, greenish or yellowish keeled; style
2-fid, flattened, pubescent on margins; nut ⅓ length of glume, biconvex,
5-9 ribbed, white.

Nubia; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Dongola Prov.; Berber Prov.
(Shendi); Khartoum Prov. (Tuti Island); Fung Prov. (Abdin); White Nile
Prov. (Geteina).


=F. diphylla= _Vahl._

Annual, glabrous to pubescent; stems tufted, 4-28 in. long. Leaves ⅓-⅔
length of stem. Umbel compound of usually many spikelets; bracts 3-4,
shorter than umbel. Spikelets solitary, ¼-½ in. long, terete, straw-
coloured, rusty brown, or variegated; fertile glumes hardly keeled,
often ciliate; style 2-fid, dilated at base, flattened, villous on
margins; nut ⅓ length of glume, biconvex, whitish.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli, Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas & Jur Aweit; Bongo-land: Addai); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=F. ferruginea= _Vahl._

Herb, frequently biennial; stems tufted, 8-28 in. long. Leaves from ⅓
length of stem to almost absent, hairy or glabrous. Umbel simple or
slightly compound, of usually 5-10 spikelets; bracts shorter than umbel.
Spikelets solitary, 2/5 in. long, ovoid oblong, dense, rust-coloured,
more or less variegated with red-brown or green; glumes ovate, upper
part of back grey-puberulous. Style 2-fid, longer than nut, flattened;
nut ½ length of glume, biconvex, pale yellow to brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas).


=F. exilis= _Roem._ & _Schultes._

Hairy annual; stems tufted, 4-16 in. long. Leaves ⅓-½ length of stem.
Umbel of 3-14 pedicelled spikelets; bracts 3-4, as long as umbel.
Spikelets ¼-⅓ in. long, 10-12 fld., pale rusty and chestnut; glumes
ovate, acute, pubescent, keeled and mucronate; sta. 2-3; style slightly
shorter than nut, 3-fid, base dilated with a constriction; nut ab. ½
length of glume, 3-angled, transversely wrinkled, white to pale brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov.; Darfur Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Shambé, Jur: Jur Ghattas);
Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=F. cioniana= _P. Savi._

Umbel of 10-25 spikelets, rather dense. Spikelets 1/8-1/5 in. long,
pale-rusty; points of glumes rather long; nut small, yellowish, with
transverse lines; otherwise as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=F. Schweinfurthiana= _Boeck._

Glabrous herb; stems tufted, 8-12 in. long: basal sheaths brown,
fringed. Leaf of uppermost sheath ½ length of stem. Umbel of 2-9
spikelets, subcompound; bracts 2-3, ½ in. long. Spikelets 1/5 by ⅛ in.,
dull brown; glumes obtuse; style shorter than nut, deciduous with
pyramidal base, branches 3, long; nut less than ½ length of glume,
smooth, brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=F. subaphylla= _Boeck._

Glabrous herb; rhizome short; stems approximate, 12-16 in. long,
4-angled at top. Leaves ½-2 in. long. Umbel 2-4 in. diam., of 30-60
spikelets; bracts 2-3, under 1 in.; spikelets ⅓ by 1/12 in., 5-14 fld.,
light brown; style longer than nut, deciduous with style base, 3-fid;
nut ab. ⅓ length of glume, obovoid, smooth or warted, white or
yellowish.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main river).


=F. monostachya= _Vahl._

Glabrous herb; stems tufted, 2-16 in. long. Leaves ½ length of stem.
Spikelet usually 1 (1-3) on each stem, ½ by 1/5 in. and few-flowered or
larger and many-fld., greenish-white or yellowish; glumes ovate, keeled,
mucronate, lower distichous, upper spiral; style longer than nut, hairy
deciduous with base, 3-fid; nut less than ½ length of glume, pyriform,
straw-coloured or pale brown, tubercled.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Nganye).


=F. falcifolia= _Boeck._

Pale green, glabrous herb; stems tufted, 4-6 in. long, 5-angled
compressed. Leaves few, 2-3 in. long, falcate, margins serrulate,
sheaths short. Umbel subcompound, 5-7 rayed; bracts 3-4, ab. ½ length of
umbel; rays capillary, up to 1 in. long, with 2-3 branches. Spikelets
obl.-lanc., 10-13 fld., ¼ in. long; glumes rigid, appressed, broad
ovate, shortly mucronate; nut under ½ length of glume, pale straw-
coloured.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


831 =Bulbostylis sphærocarpus= _C. B. Clarke._

Tufted annual; stem 2-5 in. long, glabrous, with 1 spikelet. Leaves ¾
length of stem, capillary minutely hairy, sheaths somewhat bearded in
mouth. Bract ½ in. long, setaceous; spikelet ¼ by 1/14 in., bearing a
few nuts at base, male above; fertile glumes ovate, acuminate, rust-
coloured, scabrous-hairy; hypog. bristles, none in this genus; sta. 2-3;
style 3-fid, nearly as long as nut, base persistent on nut, black; nut
less than ½ length of glume, obovoid, transverse-wavy, straw-coloured.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=B. filamentosa= _Kunth._

Tufted herb; stems 8-20 in. long, 3-angled and hairy at top. Leaves ⅔
length of stem, setaceous; sheaths hairy, with long white hairs in the
throat. Head 1, 1/3-2/5 in. diam., of 6-14 bright brown spikelets;
bracts 2-3, lowest overtopping the head. Spikelets 1/6 by 1/12 in., to
6-10 fld.; glumes ovate, pubescent; sta. 3; style 3-fid, base
persistent, ovoid, slightly darker than nut; nut 2/5 length of glume,
acutely 3-angled, pallid, with obscure transverse lines.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).


=B. pusilla= _C. B. Clarke._

Tufted annual; stems 1-5 in. long with 1-9 spikelets, glabrous. Leaves ½
length of stems, setaceous. Spikelets in simple or compound lax umbel,
all solitary or some clustered 2-3 together; bracts short, setaceous;
spikelets ab. ⅛ by ½ in., but sometimes up ¼ in. broad, ab. 12 fld.;
glumes ovate; sta. 2; style 3-fid, length of nut, base persistent; nut ⅔
length of glume, broadly obovoid, black with 2 transverse wavy lines.

Kordofan Prov. (El Abiad).


=B. abortiva= _C. B. Clarke._

Densely tufted herb; stems 6-24 in. long, very slender, glabrous. Leaves
½ length of stem, filiform; sheath with few white hairs at throat. Umbel
up to 4-6 in. diam., compound; bracts much shorter than umbel,
setaceous. Spikelets numerous, pedicelled; otherwise as above.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas).


=B. coleotricha= _C. B. Clarke._

Stems densely tufted, 4-16 in. long, very slender, minutely hairy at
top. Leaves ½ length of stem, setaceous; sheaths with long white hairs
in throat. Umbel usually simple or compound, 2 in. diam., of numerous
solitary spikelets (rarely 1-3 spikelets only); bracts setaceous, often
overtopping umbel. Spikelets ovoid, ¼ in. long, brown; glumes ovate,
obtuse, keel green; style 3-fid, as long as nut, base persistent as a
small, dark button; nut ½ length of glume, pale brown, smooth, appearing
dotted.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


832 =Scirpus cubensis= _Poeppig_ & _Kunth._

Glabrous, except glumes; stolons present or stem decumbent and rooting;
stem 1-2 ft. long, stout 3-angled at top, nodeless. Leaves ab. as long
as stem, 1/5 in. broad. Umbel simple; heads 1-12, stellate-globose, ½
in. diam., on ped. ½-2½ in. long; bracts up to 5-10, up to 1 ft. long.
Spikelets numerous in head, ⅙-⅓ in. long, many fld.; glumes ovate,
acute, rigid, margins ciliate; hypog. bristles 0; sta. 1-3; style
linear, confluent into ovary, 2-fid; nut ⅔ length of glume, narrowly
obovoid, corky at base, smooth, beaked.

Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Main river).


=S. supinus= _Linn._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted; nodeless, 2-12 in. long, terete. Leaves
usually under 1 in. long. Head 1; lowest bract continuing the stem; 1-6
in. long. Spikelets 1-7 in the head, 1/5-½ in. long, ellipsoid, dusky
green; glumes ovate, acute, entire at tip; hypog. bristles 0; style
linear, usually 3-fid; nut obovoid, black with transverse wavy lines.

Darfur Prov.


=S. articulatus= _Linn._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted, 2-12 in. long, when dry showing
transverse false septa. Leaves 0. Head 1, globose, apparently lateral
owing to lowest bract (terete as the stem) continuing the latter, and up
to 2 ft. long. Spikelets ¼-¾ in. long, cylindric, green or mottled-
purple and brown; glumes ovate, incurved, tip entire; hypog. bristles 0;
style linear, 3-fid; nut ab. ½ length of glume, brown, smooth or
transversely wavy.

Blue Nile Prov. (Ganeib Assad); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad); White Nile
Prov. (Kosti); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas & Kutshuk Ali’s
Zariba; Bongo: Gir & Atuoli).


=S. corymbosus= _Roth._

Glabrous herb; rhizome 2-4 in. long; stems 3 ft. long, stout, terete.
Leaves 0. Umbel apparently lateral, the lower bract 1-4 in. long
continuing the stem. Spikelets clustered, ¼-⅓ in. long, ellipsoid, dusky
brown; glumes ovate, mucronate, glabrous; hypog. bristles 0; style
linear, 3-fid; nut 2/5 length of glume, 3-angled, black, smooth,
slightly wavy.

Darfur Prov. (J. Marra: Mid Robo 8,700 ft.).


=S. maritimus= _Linn._

Glabrous herb; stolons becoming rhizomes; stems 1-3 ft. long, stout,
3-angled. Leaves as long as stem, ¼-⅓ in. broad. Umbel compound or
simple or reduced to a head of 1-3 spikelets, rarely over 4-6 in. diam.;
bracts several, lowest up to 8 in. long. Spikelets 30-40 to the umbel,
oblong, ½-1 in. long, dark brown, often clustered; glumes ovate
emarginate and mucronate, hairy at tip; hypog. bristles 3-6, usually
shorter than nut; style long, branches 2-3, long; nut variable in size,
3-angled, obovoid, black, smooth or reticulate.

Berber Prov. (Shendi).


=S. kyllingioides= _Boeck._

Glabrous perennial; stems rarely over 6 in. long, slender, nodeless.
Leaves ½ length of stem. Head 1, subglobose, ab. ⅙ in. diam., green or
pale brown with glume points prominent on all sides; bracts 3-4,
spreading, longer than head. Glumes ovate, contracted into a linear
obtuse end; hypog. bristles 0; style shorter than nut; branches 3, long;
nut ⅓ length of glume, smooth, black-brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Gendua River); Fung Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov.
(Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. squarrosus= _Linn._

Small glabrous, tufted annual; stems 2-8 in. high, nodeless. Leaves ⅓
length of stem. Head of 1-6 (rarely 10) squarrose spikelets; bracts 3-5,
1-4 in. long. Spikelets ⅛-¼ in. long, many-fld., greenish or brownish;
glumes caducous in fruit, narrowly obovate, narrowed into a mucro not
longer than glume; hypog. bristles 0; style hardly any, branches 3
short, recurved; nut ⅔ length of glume, obovoid, 3-angled, smooth; sta.
1, or rarely 2.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur
Ghattas).


=S. Isolepis= _Boeck._

Glabrous annual; stems tufted, 1-10 in. long, setaceous. Leaves ¼-1½ in.
long, setaceous. Spikelet 1 to a stem, ⅛-⅙ in. long, ovoid, not
squarrose, nut-coloured, apparently lateral owing to ¼-1 in. long bract
continuing the stem; glumes obovate, triangular at top, caducous in
fruit; hypog. bristles 0, but a very thin scale is sometimes present;
sta. 1-2; style hardly any, branches 2, short, recurved; nut length of
glume, black, smooth.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


833 =Fuirena pubescens= _Kunth._

Hairy herb; rhizome long; stems often solitary, 4-16 in. long, 3-angled,
nodose. Leaves 6 in. long, base with a prominent ligule, lowest bract as
highest leaf. Infl. a panicle 10 by 2 in., with remote peduncles, or
reduced to 1-2 few-fld. corymbose clusters. Spikelets ovoid, ¼-⅓ in.
long; glumes broad-elliptic, obtuse, hairy on back, blackish-green,
ending in a bristle ⅓-½ length of glume; hypog. bristles 0 or
rudimentary; style 3-fid; nut less than ½ length of glume, white.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (main river near Nuer villages).


=F. glomerata= _Lam._

Hairy annual; stems 4-16 in. long. Leaves 4-6 in. long. Panicle oblong
of a few clusters. Spikelets ⅓-½ by ⅛-⅙ in.; glumes dark green to dull
brown, keel continued in a long bristle; hypog. bristles 3 or 6, outer
linear or 0, 3 inner as long as nut, broad, quadrate, toothed, clawed,
falling with the nut; nut ½ length of glume, pallid, acuminate both
ends, beak narrow; style 3-fid.

Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=F. leptostachya= _Oliv._

Annual. Leaves 4-8 in. long. Spikelets ¼-⅓ by 1/16-1/10 in.; 3 interior
hypog. bristles as long as nut, lamina small, oval, or with 2 recurved
teeth.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas; Bongo: Gir); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


=F. umbellata= _Rottb._

Hairy or only the glumes; rhizome stout; stems 1½-5 ft. long, nodose.
Leaves up to 6 by ½ in. Pan. long, oblong often with many axillary
compound corymbs and 200-600 spikelets. Spikelets ¼-⅓ by ⅛-⅙ green or
dull chestnut-coloured. Glume elliptic, keel produced into a curved
bristle; hypog. bristles: 3 outer small or absent, 3 inner as long as
nut, obovate, hardly clawed; style 3-fid, linear; nut ½ length of glume,
acuminate at both ends, pallid to brown, beak small, narrow.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas; Niamniam-land: Yubbo River);
Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


834 =Lipocarpha argentea= _R. Br._

Glabrous herb; rhizome up to 1½ in.; stems tufted, 4-24 in. long,
nodeless. Leaves ⅓ to full length of stem. Head 1; bracts 2-3,
horizontal, lowest 1-4 in. long. Spikelets 3-10, ¼-½ in. long, ovoid or
cylindric; glumes dense in numerous spirals, obovate, obtuse, incurved
in fruit; hypog. scales (not bristles) shorter than glume; sta. 2; style
⅔ length of nut, branches 2-3 short; nut ½ length of scale, brown-black,
smooth.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Meshra El Rek); Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=L. Prieuriana= _Steud._

Glabrous herb; stems tufted, 4-16 in. long, 3-angled. Leaves ¼-½ length
of stem. Spikelets 3-18 to a head, ⅓ by ⅛ in., cylindric, dense, smooth,
reddish to purple; bracts 3-7, spreading, up to 4 in. long; glumes
broadly obovate, obtuse; hypog. hyaline scales 2, lower suborbicular,
5-nerved; nut obovoid-globose; style branches 3, almost sessile.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


835 =Ascolepis protea= _Welw._ =var.= β. =bellidiflora= _Welw._

Glabrous herb; stems 4-15 in. long, nodeless. Leaves ½ length of stem.
Head 1 of 1-6 spikelets, straw-coloured, ¼-¾ in. diam., hemispheric or
subglobose; bracts 3-4, 1-2½ in. long. Glumes lin.-lanc., hyaline scale
(_squamella_) solitary, up to ⅓-½ in. long or more; protruding beyond
glume; sta. 1; style ½ length of nut, 2-3-fid; nut minute, dark brown.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=A. capensis= _Benth._

Glabrous herb; stems tufted, 8-20 in. long. Leaves ½-¾ length of stem,
narrow. Head of 1-3 spikelets, fused or nearly distinct, whitish; bracts
3, lowest 1-4 in. long, spreading. Spikelets ⅓-½ in. long, ovoid, dense;
glumes oblong, shorter than the solitary squamella, which is flattened
and shaped as a watch-pocket with a beak to the front up to ⅙ in. long.
Style 2-fid, hardly exserted from the pocket; nut sessile, black,
compressed.

Upper White Nile Prov.; Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas, Jur
Aweit); Bahr El Jebel.


(_iii_) _Empty glumes at base of spikelet 3; fertile glume 1; hypogynous
bristles 6; inflorescence panicled; fertile fl. bisexual._


836 =Rhynchospora aurea= _Vahl._

Nearly glabrous herb; stem nodose, 3-6 ft. long. Leaves 1-2 ft. by ½ in.
Panicle up to 16 in. long with lower axillary distant corymbs 2-5 in.
diam., bearing 100-200 spikelets. Spikelets usually in clusters of 3-10;
hypog. bristles 6, barbed upwards; style subentire or obscurely 2-fid,
base dilated; nut ½ length of glume, notched each side, beak as long as
nut.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


(_iv_) _Flowers unisexual; spikelets with 1 fem. flower only; infl.
panicled or capitate; hypog. bristles 0 to many._


837 =Scleria pergracilis= _Kunth._

Almost glabrous annual; stems tufted, 1-2 ft. long, nodose, slender.
Leaves 4-12 in. long, narrow. Spikelets many, bearing both male and fem.
fl. in clusters of 2-5, ⅛-⅙ in. long, sessile, on a spike 2-5 in. long;
bracts to the clusters ovate, acute, ab. length of clusters, 2-sexual
(monœcious) spikelet of ab. 7 glumes, 2 lowest empty, the third carrying
the nut, ⅛-⅙ in. long, elliptic-oblong, dark brown; upper glumes male or
empty; also many spikelets similar to foregoing, without fem. fl.; sta.
1-3; anthers crested; style linear 3-fid, not dilated at base; nut
minute, white; hypog. bristles 0.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. melanotricha= _A. Rich._

Hairy annual; stems 4-24 in. long, slender. Leaves ½-⅔ length of stem.
Spike 2-7 in. long, ciliate, with long rusty-black or white hairs, with
cluster of 3-12 spikelets, ¼-⅓ in. diam., sessile, pendent; bracts
inconspicuous. Spikelets 1/5 in. long, black-red or pallid; nut 1/16 in.
long, straw-coloured; otherwise much as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gir).


=S. Buchanani= _Boeck._

Sparsely hairy perennial; stems 12-20 in. long, base bulbous. Leaves
4-12 in. long. Spike subsimple, 3-6 in. long; lower bracts often longer
than the clusters of 4-10 spikelets, which are suberect in fruit and 1/5
in. long; nut minute, white, smooth.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=S. Schweinfurthiana= _Boeck._

Thinly hairy perennial; stems 1-2 ft. long, not bulbous. Leaves 4-12 in.
long. Spike subsimple with 10-14 clusters of often 10-12 spikelets on a
rhachis 4-8 in. long; spikelets ¼ in. long, ellipsoid-oblong, chestnut-
coloured; nut white, tubercled on shoulders, minute.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=S. glandiformis= _Boeck._

Herb, nearly glabrous except ligule; stems 16-24 in. long. Leaves up to
1 ft. long. Panicle with lower peduncle remote, nearly included in
sheath of the bract, carrying oblong inflorescences with 6-12 nuts,
whence bracts ½-1½ in. long diverge; monœcious spikes none, or very few.
Spikelets nearly ¼ in. long, straw-coloured, marked with brown; nut ⅙
in. long, cylindric, tessellated, stalked, with short pallid 3- (ovate)
lobed straw-coloured hypog. disk, hardly longer than the stalks of the
nut.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. globonux= _C. B. Clarke._

Leaves with spreading hairs or glabrate. Nut large, globose, tessellate,
minutely hairy on edge of reticulations; hypog. disc 3-lobed, lobes
subquadrate; otherwise as above.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. complanata= _Boeck._

Annual; stems 3 ft. long, minutely rusty retrorse scabrous. Leaves 4-12
in. long. Lowest axillary ped. hardly exserted from sheath; ped.
carrying 1-4 fem. fl.; nut-bearing spikelets ab. ¼ in. long, pale green
or reddish; spikelet bract as long as it; nut small, subglobose,
tessellated, pallid; hypog. disc short funnel-shaped with 3 thin straw-
coloured ovate lobes.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. Schimperiana= _Boeck._ =var. hypoxis= _C. B. Clarke._

Slightly hairy herb; stems 16 in. long. Leaves 12 in. long, ¼ in. or
more broad, very obtuse at tip. Lowest axillary ped. exserted 1-2 in.,
carrying 3-5 nuts. Fem. spikelets ¼ in. long, chestnut-brown; nut large,
depressed globose, smooth, white; hypog. disc with 3 small oblong,
pallid lobes.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat: Matamma).


=S. canaliculato-triquetra= _Boeck._

Robust herb; stem 3-5 ft. long. Leaves 8-12 by ¼-⅓ in. Lowest axillary
peduncle remote, often exserted 3-6 in., carrying up to 20-50 spikelets.
Nut ⅛ in. long, ovoid, white, smooth; 3 lobes of disc small, tipped with
minute tails.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. gracillima= _Boeck._

Very slender, glabrous herb; stems 16-24 in. long, almost capillary,
each bearing 2-3 nuts. Leaves 4-8 in. long, narrow. Pan. very slender,
with few branches; lowest ped. remote, exserted ½-1½ in., nodding, with
1 nut. Spikelets all 1-sexual, the fem. scarcer, 1/6-1/5 in. long; nut
minute, globose, smooth, white; lobes of disc 3, short, rounded.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas).


=S. melanomphala= _Kunth._

Robust, glabrate to hairy herb; rhizome creeping; stems 2-3 ft. long,
scabrous to smooth, 3-angled. Leaves up to 24 by ⅓ in., scabrous on
margins. Infl. straggling 1-2 ft., compound, partial panicles dense
oblong to linear. Spikelets 1-sexual, ¼-⅓ in. long, green or mottled
with brown; nut ⅛ in. long, ovoid, smooth, white or with black tip; disc
obpyramidal, large, ruddy black, margin triangular yellow; lobes 0.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: River Hoo, Buddu); Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=S. racemosa= _Poir._

Robust, glabrous herb; rhizome thick scaly; stems 3-6 ft. long. Leaves
1-2 ft. by ½-1¼ in. 3-nerved, scabrous on margins, near top suddenly
narrowed; sheaths 3-winged; ligule ovate 3-angular, up to ¼ in. long.
Infl. up to 1 ft. long; partial panicles 2-3 in. long on stout axillary
peduncles, forming a terminal compound panicle. Spikelets 1-sexual, 1/5
in. long, pallid or dark; fem. glumes ovate, shorter than nut; nut ¼-⅙
in. long, ovoid, white or coloured; disc thickened, the lobes forming a
cup with densely ciliate margin, holding the base of the nut.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River);
Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


838 =Diplacrum africanum= _C. B. Clarke._

Weak, nearly glabrous annual; stems tufted, 2-5 in. long, leafy. Leaves
1-1½ in. by 1/8-1/5 in., tip suddenly acuminate. Infl. of minute
axillary heads often all up the stem. Spikelets ab. 1/10 in. long,
ovate-lanc., greenish, all 1-sexual; nut minute, subglobose, white,
striate.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur: Jur Ghattas); Bahr El Jebel (Madi).


839 =Eriospora schweinfurthiana= _C. B. Clarke._

Glabrous perennial; stems tufted, 2 ft. high, bearing leaves all the way
up. Leaves 4-16 by ¼ in.; sheaths stout, straw-coloured, imbricate,
striate, split as in grasses with a ring of short hairs in the mouth.
Pan. 8-14 in. long with several peduncles, 3-6 in. long, from each
sheath, often carrying narrow panicles. Spikelets ⅓ in. long, 2-3-fid,
dusky straw-coloured; bracts ovate, acuminate; glumes ovate; hypog.
hairs numerous, fine; sta. 1-3; nut from an ovoid base tapering into a
beak, altogether ab. 1/5 in. long; style short, branches 3, longer.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam-land: Baginze mountain).


                              =GRAMINEÆ.=

                    A KEY TO THE GENERA OF GRASSES.

      Adapted from O. Stapf. in _Flora of Tropical Africa_, vol. ix.


Subfamily I. PANICOIDEÆ.

Mature spikelets falling entire from their pedicels, or with them;
perfect spikelets with two heteromorphous flowers, the upper perfect,
the lower male or barren.

 Tribe I. MAYDEÆ. Sexes in different inflorescences, male spikelets in
 large terminal panicles, female spikelets in “cobs” in the axils of the
 lower leaves.

  Only genus.

                                                               840 =Zea=

 Tribe II. ANDROPOGONEÆ.

 Spikelets in pairs, usually one sessile, the other stalked, very rarely
 both stalked. Glumes more or less rigid, and firmer than the valves,
 the lower always larger than the florets. Valves membranous, often
 transparent, that of the upper floret awned or reduced to an awn, or
 blunt.

 A. Joints and pedicels more or less stout, three cornered or rounded.

  i. Fertile spikelets 2-flowered; fertile floret awned from the sinus
  of the 2-divided or 2-toothed valve.

   (a) Racemes in pairs or digitate.

    (b) Pedicelled spikelets developed; lower glume flat, keels
    frequently winged or marginate.

                                                          841 =Ischæmum=

    (bb) Pedicelled spikelets represented by a narrow curved pedicel,
    lower glume convex, covered all over with transverse much raised
    teeth or warts, not keeled.

                                                        842 =Thelepogon=

   (aa) Racemes always solitary on the stems or branches. Glumes not
   winged, the upper of the sessile spikelets with a silky-haired awn.

                                                            843 =Sehima=

  ii. Fertile spikelets 1- or 2-flowered, fertile florets awnless.

   (a) Racemes in spatheate inflorescences, racemosely arranged on a
   common axis, or subpaniculate or solitary.

    (b) Lower glume smooth, long tailed, racemes digitate, spikelets
    2-flowered.

                                                            844 =Vossia=

    (bb) Lower glume rough, not tailed, racemes panicled, spikelets
    1-flowered.

                                                          845 =Jardinea=

   (aa) Racemes at the end of the stems and their branches, in a false
   spatheate panicle, or solitary and terminal on simple or sparingly
   branched stems.

    (b) Sessile spikelets small, globose, 1-flowered; joints and
    pedicels fused.

                                                         846 =Manisuris=

    (bb) Sessile spikelets not globose.

     (c) Racemes usually more or less with long soft hairs, never
     cylindrical, joints and pedicels moderately, stout, gaping.

      (d) Spikelets 2-flowered, very softly hairy all over.

                                                          847 =Lasiurus=

      (dd) Spikelets 1-flowered, racemes more or less hairy from the
      joints and pedicels or the edges of the spikelets; lower glume
      with a transparent oil-duct inside each keel, or a fringe of hairy
      warts.

                                                         848 =Elyonurus=

     (cc) Racemes smooth (not hairy), cylindrical, particularly when the
     spikelets are closed.

      (d) Pedicels and joints fused.

       (e) Racemes stout, few from each stem, sessile spikelets
       2-flowered.

                                                        849 =Rottbœllia=

       (ee) Racemes slender in ample spatheate panicles, sessile,
       spikelets 1-flowered.

                                                          850 =Ophiurus=

      (dd) Pedicels free from the joints.

       (e) Pedicels club-shaped, joints cup-shaped, gaping, spikelets of
       each pair similar, 2-flowered smooth.

                                                      851 =Chasmopodium=

       (ee) Pedicels and joints touching the main axis behind. Pedicels
       spikelets usually much reduced, back of the lower glume usually
       transversely rough.

                                                         852 =Rhytachne=

 AA. Joints and pedicels slender, thread-like, of uniform width or wedge
 or club-shaped; fertile spikelets usually 1-flowered and awned.

  (i) All spikelets alike in shape and sex.

   (a) Axis of racemes tough, all spikelets pedicelled. Racemes in
   spike-like or spindle-shaped solitary panicles, spikelets blunt, not
   awned, glumes delicate.

                                                          853 =Imperata=

   (aa) Axis of racemes readily breaking up at joints; spikelets paired,
   one sessile, the other pedicelled. Panicles wide, more or less
   silvery and feathery; spikelets usually armed.

                                                         854 =Saccharum=

  (ii) The spikelets of each pair different in sex and frequently also
  in shape and size, or if alike in sex, then both male or neuter.

   (a) Racemes in more or less compound espatheate panicles; pedicels
   without a translucent middle line. Stalked spikelets male, neuter, or
   quite suppressed. Awn from the sinus of the 2 divided valve.

    (b) Spikelets compressed on the back (at least when in flower).

                                                           855 =Sorghum=

    (bb) Spikelets more or less compressed laterally.

     (c) Racemes of many pairs of spikelets.

                                                         856 =Vetiveria=

     (cc) Racemes usually reduced to 1 sessile male, and 2 pedicelled or
     barren spikelets.

                                                       857 =Chrysopogon=

   (aa) Racemes not in compound espatheate panicles, or if so, then the
   pedicels with a translucent middle line.

    (b) Fertile valve awned from low down on the back.

                                                         859 =Arthraxon=

    (bb) Fertile valve awned from the sinus of a 2-divided or 2-dentate
    valve, or continuing the more or less minutely stalked valve.

     (c) Margins of the lower glume of the fertile spikelets incurved
     and the glume sharply 2-keeled more or less all along, with a
     short, obtuse, hard point. Awn smooth or roughish, very rarely
     hairy. _Andropogon_ (sp.).

      (d) spikelets awned, the awn forming a continuation of the
      minutely stalked fertile glume.

       (e) Racemes digitate or racemosely arranged.

        (f) Sessile spikelets of all pairs perfect, awned.

                                                       860 =Amphilophis=

        (ff) Sessile spikelets of the lowest 1-3 pairs male or neuter,
        and awnless.

                                                       861 =Dichanthium=

       (ee) Racemes solitary.

                                                        858 =Eremopogon=

      (dd) Awn from the sinus of the 2-divided or 2-toothed fertile
      valve.

       (e) Racemes solitary at the ends of the stalks and their
       branches, usually gathered into a narrow, lax, spatheate, false
       panicle; joints and pedicels often somewhat stout.

        (f) Pedicelled spikelets not conspicuously larger than the
        sessile, very often smaller to very small, upper glume awnless.

                                                     862 =Schizachyrium=

        (ff) Pedicelled spikelets very much larger than the sessile,
        almost concealing them; upper glume awned.

                                                         863 =Diectomis=

       (ee) Racemes mostly in pairs at the end of undivided stalks, or
       gathered into spatheate false, or true, panicles, each pair
       supported or surrounded by a spathe; more rarely the racemes
       digitate, the lateral always sessile, joints and pedicels narrow
       and of uniform width.

        (f) Racemes mostly in pairs or sometimes digitate at the end of
        simple or almost simple stems.

                                                        864 =Andropogon=

        (ff) Racemes always in pairs, with a spathe or sheath supporting
        or surrounding each pair, gathered into often much divided
        spatheate panicles, mostly aromatic grasses.

                                                        865 =Cymbopogon=

     (cc) Margins of the lower glume of the fertile spikelet inrolled
     and 2-keeled only close to the tips, with the hardened base
     elongate and sharp pointed. Awn hairy or glabrous.

      (d) Awn from the sinus of the 2-divided fertile valve.

       (e) Racemes paired in more or less compound panicles; awn hairy.

        Only genus.

                                                       866 =Hyparrhenia=

       (ee) Racemes usually much reduced, solitary at the end of the
       stalks and their branches, or in more or less compound panicles;
       awns smooth.

        Only genus.

                                                       867 =Monocymbium=

      (dd) Awn from the minutely stalked fertile valve, hairy.

       (e) Racemes many-jointed, solitary.

        Only genus.

                                                       868 =Heteropogon=

       (ee) Racemes few-jointed, much contracted solitary on the
       branches of decompound panicles.

        Only genus.

                                                           869 =Themeda=

Tribe III. PANICEÆ.

Spikelets in usually continuous spikes, racemes or panicles. Glumes thin
and green or membranous, the lower generally smaller, very small or
suppressed. Lower valve generally resembling the glumes in structure and
nerves, the upper fertile firmer, at length rigid, often papery to
brittle, awnless, very rarely shortly pointed (_Urochloa_,
_Alloteropsis_ sp.), or finely awned (_Alloteropsis_ sp.).

 A. Inflorescence of usually slender (stout in _Alloteropsis_) spike-
 like, digitate, very rarely solitary racemes. Fruiting valve with
 usually flat, thin to transparent margins, often brown or black.

  (a) Spikelets quite awnless.

                                                         870 =Digitaria=

  (aa) Spikelets slender awned from the fertile valve.

                                                      871 =Alloteropsis=

 AA. Inflorescence various, not as A. Fruiting valve with more or less
 inrolled margins, usually brittle, straw coloured or whitish.

  (a) Spikelets falling entire and singly from the persistent pedicels.

   (b) Spikelets not awned, or if awned, with the awn from the undivided
   tips of the upper glume and lower valve.

    (c) Inflorescence not an open or contracted and cylindrical panicle,
    usually composed of spikelike racemes, the spikelets of which face
    one direction.

     (d) Back of the fruit away from the axis.

      (e) Lower glume rudimentary, forming with the base of its stalk a
      swollen annular callus. Fruit minutely pointed.

                                                         872 =Eriochloa=

      (ee) No callus at the base of the spikelet, lower glume present.

                                                        873 =Brachiaria=

     (dd) Back of fruit turned to axis.

      (e) Lower glume absent.

                                                          874 =Paspalum=

      (ee) Lower glume developed.

       (f) Glumes neither awned nor tailed.

        (g) Spikelets crowded, more or less contiguous.

         (h) Fruiting valve acute, not shortly pointed, spikelets
         solitary, closely 2-rowed, false spikes rigid.

                                                       875 =Paspalidium=

         (hh) Fruiting valve obtuse, abruptly short pointed or tipped,
         spikelets solitary or paired, false spikes often curved or
         bent.

                                                          876 =Urochloa=

        (gg) Spikelets very laxly arranged, in one row.

                                                         878 =Acroceras=

       (ff) Glumes with a tail or awn.

        (g) Glumes awned from the undivided, acute or tapering tip, or
        prolonged into a tail. Racemes dense, more or less one sided.

                                                       877 =Echinochloa=

        (gg) Glumes awned from the slightly notched tip.

                                                        879 =Oplismenus=

    (cc) Inflorescence an open panicle, or cylindrical and spikelike.

     (d) Spikelets not supported by bristle-like branches, inflorescence
     a panicle.

                                                           880 =Panicum=

     (dd) Spikelets without bristles, but inflorescence composed of
     cylindrical false spikes with a stout axis, spikelets more or less
     swollen.

                                                       881 =Sacciolepis=

     (ddd) All the spikelets, or only the upper of each branch supported
     by bristle-like branchlets. Inflorescence cylindrical and spike-
     like.

                                                           882 =Setaria=

   (bb) Spikelets finely awned from the notched tips of the upper glume,
   and barren valve.

    (c) Upper glume swollen at or below middle, 5-nerved, nerves faint,
    hidden by copious and long silky hairs.

                                                        883 =Tricholæna=

    (cc) Upper glume, not swollen, 5-7-nerved, nerves conspicuous.

                                                           884 =Melinis=

  (aa) Spikelets falling in groups, or if singly, then surrounded by a
  whorl of bristles, or at least supported by 1 to several bristles.

   (b) Whorl of bracts formed by hardened lower glumes of the spikelets
   of each cluster, clusters spike-like.

                                                        885 =Anthephora=

   (bb) Whorl formed of bristles, sometimes feathery, free, is not
   united.

                                                        886 =Pennisetum=

   (bbb) Whorl of spines or rigid bristles united at the base into a
   hard cup.

                                                          887 =Cenchrus=

Subfamily II. POOIDEÆ.

Mature spikelets breaking up, leaving the persistent or sub-persistent
glumes on the pedicel, or if falling entire, not consisting of 2
heteromorphous flowers as in Panicoideæ.

 A. Blades of leaves never transversely veined.

  B. Awn of the fertile floret, if present, kneed and twisted below the
  knee, or straight in reduced forms. (Up to _Perotis_.)

   C. Florets 2 or more. (Up to _Phragmites_.)

    Tribe IV. ARUNDINELLEÆ.

    Florets 2, heteromorphous, the lower awnless or barren. Lower valve
    awnless, upper always awned, at length firm or hard. Awn from the
    sinus between 2 sometimes minute lobes, usually kneed and twisted
    below the knee.

     (a) Spikelets solitary on distinct pedicels.

                                                      888 =Trichopteryx=

     (aa) Spikelets in clusters of 3.

                                                        889 =Tristachya=

    Tribe V. AVENEÆ.

    Florets 2 to many, all alike, glumes generally transparent, thin,
    and dry. Awn if present, from the back or from the sinus, kneed and
    usually twisted below the knee.

     (a) Valves awned from the back.

                                                             890 =Avena=

     (aa) Valve awned from the sinus of the more or less distinctly
     2-lobed tip.

                                                         891 =Danthonia=

    Tribe VI. ARUNDINEÆ.

    Florets 2 to many, enveloped by very long hairs. Glumes and valves
    membranous, often clear, awnless or minutely awned from the tips.

     Only genus.

                                                        892 =Phragmites=

   CC. Floret one. (Up to _Perotis_.)

    Tribe VII. AGROSTEÆ.

    Floret 1. Valve membranous or thin and green, not or hardly changed
    when mature, usually ending abruptly. Awn, if present, from the
    back.

     (a) Spikelets in compact heads or false spikes, glumes awnless.

                                                        893 =Heleochloa=

     (aa) Spikelets not in compact false spikes, more or less spike-
     like, glumes awned from the notched or lobed tips.

                                                         894 =Polypogon=

    Tribe VIII. STIPEÆ.

    Floret 1. Valve hardened when mature, tightly enveloping the fruit,
    awn terminal. Awns 3, from the entire tip; or one, simple below and
    3 branched above.

                                                          895 =Aristida=

    Tribe IX. ZOYSIEÆ.

    Floret 1, mature spikelets falling entire and singly, or in
    clusters. Valve small, delicately membranous. Spikelets in slender
    spike-like panicles or racemes.

     (a) Glumes awnless and at least the upper rough.

      (b) Spikelets in sessile clusters of 2-4; lower glume minute,
      transparent or suppressed.

                                                            896 =Tragus=

      (bb) Spikelets in pairs, or solitary on a flattened stalk and
      falling with it, both glumes rough.

                                                           897 =Latipes=

     (aa) Glumes drawn out into a long fine awn. Spikelets solitary,
     smooth, spikes usually long.

                                                           898 =Perotis=

  BB. Awn of fertile floret, if present, never kneed and twisted below
  the knee. (Up to _Bromus_.)

   C. Valves typically 3-nerved. (Up to _Tripogon_.)

    Tribe X. SPOROBOLEÆ.

    Floret 1. Glumes and valves very similar. Valve membranous, acute or
    obtuse, not changed when ripe, awnless, usually olive or olive grey.
    Seed often free in the delicate seed-coat.

     Only genus.

                                                        899 =Sporobolus=

    Tribe XI. ERAGROSTEÆ.

    Florets usually numerous (1 in _Leptochloa_ sp.) and protruding from
    the glumes. Spikelets pedicelled and variously panicled, or sessile
    or subsessile in spikes which are racemosely arranged. Glumes and
    valves rather similar. Valves membranous, very often olive green or
    olive grey, very rarely with a very short awn. (_Diplachne_ sp.).

     (a) Valves undivided, not short pointed, usually smooth,
     occasionally hairy. (_Eragrostis_ sp.).

      (b) Spikes straight, crowded into a long narrow dense panicle,
      spikelets very closely packed.

                                                      900 =Desmostachya=

      (bb) Spikelets usually in panicles, rarely in spikes.

                                                        901 =Eragrostis=

     (aa) Valves usually notched and minutely pointed, frequently more
     or less hairy near the base or along the sides.

      (b) Spikelets much over 1/25 in. long, in often flexuous spike-
      like racemes, or in short contracted panicles; valves often dark.

                                                         902 =Diplachne=

      (bb) Spikelets rarely over 1/25 in. long in very slender spikes on
      a long common axis, valves usually pale with green nerves.

                                                        903 =Leptochloa=

    Tribe XII. CHLORIDEÆ.

    Spikelets sessile or subsessile, in 2-ranked, secund, usually very
    dense, rarely loose spikes; spikes solitary, or digitate, or
    racemosely arranged on a common axis. Valves generally membranous to
    papery. Awn, if any, straight, fine, from the blunt or notched tip,
    or all 3 nerves running out into short awns or bristles.

     (a) Valves undivided, notched, or more or less 2-toothed or
     2-lobed, blunt, or with the middle nerve running out into an awn,
     or minute point. (_Trichoneura_.)

      (b) Spikelets 1-flowered.

       (c) Spikelets with long flexuous awns in dense digitate spikes.

                                                      904 =Schœnefeldia=

       (cc) Spikelets awnless or very shortly awned.

        (d) Spikes solitary.

                                                        905 =Microchloa=

        (dd) Spikes always digitate.

                                                           906 =Cynodon=

      (bb) Spikelets with several florets.

       (c) Spikelets with 1, rarely 2 (_Chloris_ sp.), fertile, and 1 or
       several imperfect florets above or below the fertile.

        (d) Fertile florets with imperfect florets above it.

         (e) Valves with a short erect awn from the notched tips.
         Spikelets in long, secund solitary spikes.

                                                       907 =Enteropogon=

         (ee) Spikelets in digitate spikes, rarely solitary; valves
         awned from below the tips.

                                                           908 =Chloris=

        (dd) Fertile florets with 2 imperfect florets below and 2 or
        more above. Spikes solitary, secund, compact, upper glume
        turning from the axis, with a stiff bristle from the back.

                                                           909 =Ctenium=

       (cc) Spikelets with 2 or more fertile florets, and without
       imperfect ones below them.

        (d) Valves awnless, or with a rigid point or very short awn from
        the fine tips, undivided or nearly so.

         (e) Spikelets in digitate or subdigitate spikes.

          (f) Glumes broad, not keeled, grain deeply hollowed out on the
          face.

                                                        910 =Cœlachyrum=

          (ff) Glumes strongly keeled; grain not hollowed out.

           (g) Spikes terminated by a spikelet, glumes and valves not
           finely pointed or obscurely so.

                                                          911 =Eleusine=

           (gg) Spikes terminating with a sharp point; upper glume and
           valves rigidly sharp pointed or shortly awned.

                                                    912 =Dactyloctenium=

         (ee) Spikelets in racemose spikes.

                                                           913 =Dinebra=

        (dd) Valves distinctly blunt, toothed or lobed, the middle nerve
        of the valve running out into a fine point or short awn.

                                                       914 =Trichoneura=

     (aa) Valves variously toothed or lobed, with the middle and side
     nerves running out into awns or sharp points.

      (b) Spikelets usually pedicelled, in open or contracted panicles,
      valves toothed, or lobed, and 3-awned, awns fine and bristle-like.

                                                         915 =Triraphis=

      (bb) Spikelets sessile, in solitary or racemosely arranged, often
      very short spikes.

                                                          916 =Tripogon=

   CC. Valves 5- to many-nerved. (Up to _Bromus_.)

    Tribe XIII. PAPPOPHOREÆ.

    Valves broad, cleft into 2 to many, sometimes, awnlike lobes, with
    or without alternating straight awns from the sinuses.

     (a) Fertile floret 1; valves cleft into 9 awl-like, awn-like lobes.

                                                        917 =Enneapogon=

     (aa) Fertile florets 3-5; valves cleft into 4 transparent lobes
     alternating with 5 straight awns from the sinuses.

                                                         918 =Schmidtia=

    Tribe XIV. ORYZEÆ.

    Spikelets all alike, or more or less differing and unisexual.
    Fertile floret 1, awnless, rarely even with a bristle; terminal with
    2 minute empty florets below it, solitary; glumes very minute or
    suppressed.

     (a) Spikelets panicled, fertile valve coriaceous, lower florets
     represented by two scales or bristles falling with the mature
     fruit.

                                                             919 =Oryza=

     (aa) Spikelets panicled, fertile valves papery, lower florets quite
     suppressed.

                                                           920 =Leersia=

    Tribe XV. FESTUCEÆ. Fertile florets 2 to many, rarely 1, protruding
    from the glumes. Glumes more or less resembling the valves in
    general appearance. Awns, if any, not kneed, terminal or
    subterminal.

     (a) Spikelets sessile in long cylindric dense or often interrupted
     spikes, spikelets breaking up at maturity. Glumes and valves drawn
     out into long fine points.

                                                      921 =Elytrophorus=

     (aa) Spikelets in compact ovoid heads, or short interrupted spikes;
     glumes and valves broad.

                                                          922 =Æluropus=

     (aaa) Spikelets in loose, more or less open panicles; valves lance-
     shaped, rounded on the back.

                                                            923 =Bromus=

 AA. Leaf blades transversely veined, or if not so, then tall shrubs
 with woody stems.

  Tribe XVI. PHAREÆ.

  Spikelets heteromorphous, unisexual, monoecious, the male small.
  Floret 1. One or both glumes of the male often minute. Leaf blades
  flat, very broad, many nerved, and definitely stalked.

   Only genus.

                                                             924 =Olyra=

  Tribe XVII. BAMBUSEÆ.

  Shrubs or trees, leaf blades flat. Florets one to many. Valves thin
  green to leathery.

   Only genus.

                                                     925 =Oxytenanthera=


840 =Zea Mays= _Linn._ DURA SHAMI, EISH ER RIF—Arab; MAINTAF—Nuer.

The Maize Plant. A tall annual grass with sexes in different
inflorescences, the male spikelets in terminal panicles, the female in
the axils of the sheathing leaves, forming a “cob.”

Pollination is affected by the wind.

Cultivated throughout the Sudan.


841 =Ischæmum brachyatherum= _Fenzl._ BEGHEIL, GHARAZ (N. Kordn.)—Arab;
NUN—Shilluk.

Perennial densely tufted grass up to over 3 ft. high; racemes in pairs
or threes, joints very stout, club-shaped. Spikelets in pairs, one
sessile, the other pedicelled and developed, the sessile spikelet
variably hairy, rendering the appearance very different. Awn to 5/12 in.
long, twisted, sometimes purplish.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov. (near Rahad); Upper White Nile Prov.


842 =Thelepogon elegans= _Roth._

A coarse annual grass; stems tufted, as thick as a crow quill below, and
branching above, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves up to 10 in. long and 1 in.
broad, coarsely hairy on the edges and base; racemes 2-12 in number, 2-6
in. long. Pedicelled spikelets represented by linear curved pedicel.
Glumes prominently ridged on the back. Awn up to 1 in. long, kneed at
and twisted below the middle.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post.).


843 =Sehima ischæmoides= _Forsk._

Annual with slender stems in small bundles, rarely over 1½ ft. high;
racemes solitary, sessile, 1-3 in. long, joints and pedicels densely
hairy; glume of sessile spikelet deeply channelled. Awn up to 1¾ in.
long, hairy, spirally twisted, brown in colour.

Nubia (Wadi Læmeb, between Suakin and Berber); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat,
Matamma); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Snun).


844 =Vossia cuspidata= _Griff._ UM SUF—Arab.

A very large floating grass, perennial, one of the principal
constituents of the Sudd, copiously rooting from enlarged nodes, aerial
portion up to over 3 ft. high; racemes solitary, or 2-6 on a common
axis, 6-9 in. long, short, erect, or slightly nodding; joints about ⅓
in. long, curved, swollen, lower glume of sessile spikelets smooth with
a channelled, pointed tail up to 1 in. long; spikelets 2-flowered,
awnless.

Kordofan Prov. (Takari and Birket Rahad); Upper White Nile Prov.
(Moghren El Behur); Bahr El Jebel.


845 =Jardinea congoensis= _Franch._

Tall coarse grass up to 10 ft. high, inhabiting swampy places; racemes
very numerous, slender; spikelets 1-flowered, the lower glume of the
sessile spikelets running out into a sharp point with sharp pointed
tubercles on the back, much spreading during flowering. This grass is
used for making mats, screens and baskets on the West Coast.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo-land, Kulongo).


846 =Manisuris granularis= _Sw._

Much branched annual grass up to over 3 ft. high; stems leafy to the top
with shortish, soft, hairy foliage; spikes solitary, axillary and
terminal, up to 1 in. long, partly enclosed in a spathe-like sheath;
spikelets in dissimilar pairs, sessile spikelets conspicuous on account
of their grain-like appearance.

This grass occurs in open loamy soil and is a good fodder.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Zeriba
Ghattas).


847 =Lasiurus hirsutus= _Boiss._

Perennial grass, more or less branched and woody below, branches often
in dense bundles; racemes at the end of the stalks enclosed in a spathe-
like sheath, up to 4½ inches long. Spikelets 2-flowered, densely hairy
all over; glume of sessile spikelet narrowed into a long divided beak.

Nubia (between Suakin and Berber, Wadi El Omari), Red Sea Prov. (Suakin,
Jebel Waratab).


848 =Elyonurus Royleanus= _Nees._

Aromatic annual grass; stems from a few inches up to 1 ft. high, erect,
tufted, especially above. Racemes 1¼-2¼ in. long, gathered in bunches,
straight, embraced by the spathe, only slightly protruding, often tinged
with red; spikelets 1-flowered, with the edges hairy, the lower glume
with brush-like tubercles on the margins.

Red Sea Prov. (L. 21° to 22° N.); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma);
Blue Nile Prov. (Sh. Talha).


849 =Rottbœllia exaltata= _Linn. f._

A tall coarse grass up to 12 ft. high, annual; stems stout, erect,
hispid, branching from the base. Racemes stout, 3-6 in. long,
cylindrical, particularly when the spikelets are closed.

A good fodder grass.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Jur Ghattas).


850 =Ophiurus papillosus= _Hochst._

Annual grass with rather stout stems 1½-4½ ft. high, much branched, the
branches forming ultimately a rather leafy, hairy panicle. Racemes
cylindric, slender, in simple spatheate panicles; spikelets sessile,
1-flowered. Grains oblong, 1/12 of an inch long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


851 =Chasmopodium caudatum= _Stapf._

Annual grass up to 10 ft. high, rooting from the lower nodes. Racemes
stout, cylindric, terminal, spike-like, up to 3 in. long, with a tail
formed by the elongated glume of the terminal spikelet.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


852 =Rhytachne rottbœllioides= _Desv._

Perennial, densely tufted grass; stems 1-2½ ft. high, sometimes reddish
in colour. Leaves long, narrow, especially when folded; racemes
solitary, very slender, 3-6 in. long, wavy with longitudinal grooves;
lower glumes of spikelets with transverse ridges.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Geneina.).


=R. triaristata= _Stapf._

Annual grass up to 1½ ft. high; stems in small tufts; leaves very narrow
and folded, as above. Racemes similar to above; pedicelled spikelet
represented by a terminal pair of unequal bristles.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo land, Gir.).


853 =Imperata cylindrica= _Beauv._ =var. Koenigii= _Durand_ & _Schinz._
BINGBA—Zande.

Erect, perennial grass, up to 4 ft. high; leaf sheaths long, bearded at
the nodes. Panicle spike-like, 2-8 in. long, cylindric, very dense, axis
not breaking up into joints; spikelets surrounded by long white hairs,
giving the whole a silvery appearance.

This grass is used for thatching. A bad weed.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo land, Gir); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


854 =Saccharum spontaneum= _Linn._ =var ægyptiacum.= UM GHRUF
(Fung)—Arab.

Tall, perennial, grass up to 12 ft. high, many jointed, silky below the
panicles, and coated with wax below the joints. Panicle up to 1½ ft.
long and 5 in. wide, dense, plumose, silvery; axis breaking up.

This grass is largely used for thatching; the reeds are made into arrow
shafts.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma) Blue Nile Prov. Fung Prov. (Fazoghli,
Jongol’s Post, Harun). Darfur Prov. (in wadis). Upper Nile Prov.
(Malakal).


855 =Sorghum virgatum= _Stapf._

Annual, with slender stems branched from lower and middle nodes. Panicle
narrow, very lax, ½ to over 2 ft. long, branches erect, the lowest up to
6 in. long, fine; sessile spikelets lanceolate, finely awned, deciduous
with the pedicelled spikelet, pale straw colour, greenish in the upper
portion, occasionally flushed with purplish brown.

Widely distributed in the northern Sudan, along river; also in Kordofan
and Kassala Provinces.


=S. lanceolatum= _Stapf._

Annual, with slender stems up to 10 ft. high. Panicle 9-15 in. long,
loose, more or less nodding. Sessile spikelets lanceolate, acutely
acuminate, sparingly hairy to almost smooth, straw coloured, slightly
greenish, on maturity turning bright red, finely awned. Pedicelled
spikelets deciduous. Grain obovate oblong, compressed on the back,
yellowish above, paler below, 1/8 by 1/12 in. in size.

White Nile Prov. Upper Nile Prov.


=S. sudanense= _Stapf._ GARAWI—Arab; KAWKAW—Zande.

Tall annual, up to 10 ft. high; panicle open, pyramidal, spreading, 6-12
in. long, erect, up to 6 in. wide at the base. Sessile spikelet
lanceolate to elliptic oblong, rather acute, finely hairy (white hairs),
straw-colour to light yellow, with dull green, striate tips when young.
Awned. Pedicelled spikelets persistent. Grain oval, flattened, orange,
16 in. long.

Widely distributed in northern and central Sudan. A fodder grass of
growing importance.


=S. halepense= _Pers._ ADDAR—Arab.

Perennial, up to 5 ft. high; stems slender, springing from strong
creeping rhizomes. Panicle open and spreading, 6 in.-2 ft. long. Fertile
spikelet at first hairy, later becoming smooth; pedicelled spikelets
falling early. This grass resembles Sudan Grass, but differs in the
rootstock being perennial. It is therefore not suited to cultivation.

Khartoum Prov.


=S. arundinaceum= _Stapf._ ADDAR, ADDAR ABU SHAR (Kordn.)—Arab.

Tall annual, stems up to 12 ft. high; panicle pyramidal, larger and
denser than _S. sudanense_. Pedicelled spikelets falling, narrowed to an
acute point, oblong, not minutely-stalked; with yellowish or reddish
hairs.

A good fodder grass.

Kordofan (Khor Abu Habl). Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=S. verticilliflorum= _Stapf._

Annual, 4-8 ft. high. Leaf blades 1 in. broad, sometimes flushed with
purple. Panicle up to 15 in. long, pyramidal; sessile spikelets ovate to
ovate-lanceolate, shortly narrowed to a point, hairs whitish or
purplish, awn up to ½ in. long.

Bahr El Jebel (Lat. 7° N.).


=S. abyssinicum= _Stapf._

Tall annual grass; leaves up to 2½ in. wide, panicle obovate lanceolate
in shape, over 1 ft. long and about 4 in. wide; sessile spikelets ovate-
oblong to elliptic-oblong, acute, with pale yellow hairs; awns up to 1
in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat).


=S. æthiopicum= _Rupr._

Annual, slender stalks up to 10 ft. high. Leaves up to 1 ft. long and up
to over 1 in. wide, usually strongly flushed with red or purple. Panicle
narrow, linear to linear-oblong, up to over 1 ft. long, often secund.
Sessile spikelet ovate to elliptic lanceolate, clay colour, often
reddish below; pedicelled spikelet linear lanceolate, often bright red.
Awn about 1 in. long.

Nubia (Sagadi between Suakin and Berber); Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol).


=S. aterrimum= _Stapf._ ?BURRI—Arab (Schweinf).

Annual, with slender stalks up to 6 ft. high. Leaf sheath strongly
blotched with blackish purple. Panicle narrowly oblong to ovate
lanceolate. Sessile spikelet finally glossy jet black. Awn up to ¾ in.
long, but sometimes reduced to short point.

Said to be cultivated in the South.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. guineense= _Stapf._ =var. robustum.= VUNDE—Zande; BELL—Nuer.

Tall annual up to 7 ft. high; stems stout, wavy; leaf up to over 2 ft.
by 3 in. Panicle oblong, mature spikelets gaping, exposing the grain,
which is round and dark red in colour. Glumes also dark red, glossy.

Cultivated as a food crop in the Southern Sudan. A red dye is obtained
from the leaf sheaths.

Mongalla, and Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


=S. Durra= _Stapf._ HAMAIZI, AKLIMAWI, and SAFRA KOHIA—Arab.

Tall annual grass up to 14 ft. high, leaf blades up to 15 in. by 2 in.
Panicle much more compact than preceding, ovoid or ellipsoid; spikelets
densely clustered; sessile spikelets rhombic-obovate in flower; mature
grain subglobose with a broad, round, much exposed top, white, yellow,
or reddish-yellow in colour.

_Types._ Aklimawi—glumes dull whitish with a brown band across just
below the tip, more or less white hairy; grain with very broad and
almost flattened yellow tops.

Safra Kohia—glumes more or less glossy without a dark band, straw
yellow, frequently brown or blackish at the base, grains ivory colour.

Hamaizi—glumes more or less glossy without the dark band, burnt sienna
colour to blackish, particularly below, grains reddish ochre.

Cultivated as a food crop.

White Nile Prov. (Geteina) and Blue Nile Prov.


=S. caudatum= _Stapf._

Tall annual up to 14 ft., stems stout. Panicle erect, oblong, moderately
to very dense. Sessile spikelets elliptic oblong, subobtuse or minutely
pointed, sparingly hairy. Grain very broad-elliptic to orbicular,
exposed.

=var. angolensis.= Grain up to ⅛ in. long, broad obovate in outline,
dark red, glume black. Panicle erect, oblong, rather small and compact.

Largely grown in Southern Sudan. Type KAKWA—Arab.

=var. Cerevisiæ.= Grain up to ⅛ in. long, broad obovate in outline,
purplish red in colour, glume black, panicle umbrella-shaped owing to
shortening of axis.

Grown in Southern Sudan for preparation of native beer.

=var. Schweinfurthii.= Grain over ⅛ in. long, roundish, white or ochre
salmon in colour, panicle oblong with axis running through; pedicelled
spikelets more or less persistent, up to ⅛ in. long, mature glumes straw
colour to whitish.

Types ZERZEREIH, BAHANA—Arab.

=var. fragile.= Grain over ⅛ in. long, obovate, rather flattened, mature
glumes white, brittle upwards. Panicle slightly open, branches long
ascending. Pedicelled spikelets persistent.

Type RUBAI (Sennar)—Arab.

=var. umbonatum.= Panicle as var. _fragile_, grain much flattened with a
central boss, apricot colour, lower glume transversely constricted.
Pedicelled spikelets persistent.

Type LAGHRAB EL HOMAR (Gezira)—Arab.

=var. rutilum.= Panicle obovate, rather open, mature glumes straw
coloured, tinged with red, grain ochre red to salmon on the top, paler
below. Pedicelled spikelet persistent.

Type HEGARIG—Arab.

=var. atrolutescens.= Panicle obovate, somewhat irregular and loose,
branches long and flexuous. Mature glumes black, grains sulphur or maize
yellow to ochre buff, large, flattened at the sides. Pedicelled spikelet
persistent.

Type SAFRA, HEGIRI, ABU GARADA, SHABAT AHMAR—Arab.

=var. gibbum.= Panicle rather oblong, fairly dense; pedicelled spikelets
readily deciduous; mature glumes black; grain ochre, salmon colour,
terracotta or Indian red, more or less swollen on one side.

Type WAD MASNAB, EL TORAK, ABU GARADA—Arab.

=var. Feterita.= Panicle usually oblong, rather narrow, moderately open
to dense, glumes glossy black, grain white with an enamelled appearance.

Type FETERITA.

=var. Gassabi.= Panicle dense, broadly elliptic to obovate. Glumes
white, margins, often hairy. Grain creamy globose, rather large.

Type GASSABI.


=S. papyrascens= _Stapf._

Tall annual up to 12 ft. high. Panicle oblong to oblanceolate in
outline, moderately dense, branches long, flexuous. Mature glumes
transparent, papery and brittle, breaking irregularly at the tips; grain
shorter than the glumes and completely enclosed by them, or partly
exposed where glumes are broken, obovate in shape, compressed, dull
white or orange.

=var. vesiculare= _Stapf._ Mature spikelets somewhat inflated, pale
straw colour, rather hairy, grain white.

Type FIKI EL MOSTAHI—Arab.

=var. lateritium= _Stapf._ Mature spikelets strongly flushed with brick
red, grain orange, glume very brittle upwards.

Type GADDUM EL TEITAL—Arab.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.


=S. Melaleucum= _Stapf._ SHELSHELEIH—Arab.

Tall annual. Panicles large, oblong, rather one-sided, somewhat loose;
branches slender, nodding, purple; grain white, as long as the rather
brittle, glossy black, glumes; glumes hairy upwards.

Blue Nile Province.


=S. Ankolib= _Stapf._ ANKOLIB—Arab.

Tall annual. Panicle oblong, contracted, somewhat loose when mature,
branches not very long, stout and branched, sessile spikelets very
acute, thinly leathery below and sometimes separated from the papery
upper portion by a transverse line. Grain enclosed, almost round in
outline.

The canes contain sugar and are chewed. Cultivated. Kassala Prov.
(Gallabat, Matamma); Blue Nile Prov. (Sh. Talha); Fung Prov. (Roseires).


=S. cernuum= _Host._ DURA SEIFI—Arab.

Tall annual up to 14 ft. Panicle eventually recurved, ovoid, very
compact, lower glume leathery at the base, whitish hairy all over. Grain
exposed or protruding, dull white, large. Cultivated.

Northern Sudan; Kassala Prov.


=S. purpureo-sericeum= _Aschers._ & _Schweinf._

Erect annual up to 3 ft. high; leaves up to 9 in. long by ⅓ in. wide.
Panicle up to 8 in. long, very loose; sessile spikelets lanceolate,
acuminate; lower glume wholly leathery, dark brown to black except at
the tip, with a band of soft brown hairs at the base. Awn up to 2 in.
long twisted to the middle.

Kassala Prov. (along eastern borders); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=S. dimidiatum= _Stapf._

Perennial about 2 ft. high. Panicle very narrow and small. Sessile
spikelet lanceolate acuminate, lower glume firmly coriaceous up to half
way, then abruptly thinner, the coriaceous portion turning glossy brown
or black. Awn slender, about 1 in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=S. bipennatum= _Stapf._

Annual up to 4 ft. high. Panicle narrow, oblong, up to 7 in. long, lax;
racemes reduced to a single spikelet accompanied by two slender
pedicels. Glumes coriaceous, brown, the lower whitish at the base,
silkily hairy. Awn about 1½ in. long, kneed at, and twisted below the
middle.

Bahr El Ghazal (Jurland).


856 =Vetiveria nigritana= _Stapf._

Tall, densely tufted perennial grass, with branching rootstocks and
spongy aromatic roots, up to 6 ft. high. Panicle up to over 1 ft. long,
with long slender whisk-like branches. Sessile spikelets very narrowly
lanceolate, dull green or somewhat purplish with a small bristle-like
awn.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf); Bahr
El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Bongo, and Addai).


857 =Chrysopogon Aucheri= _Stapf._ =var. quinqueplumis= _Stapf._

Tufted perennial grass up to 2 ft. high, with very slender stems,
panicled, narrow, 2-4 in. long, loose with the tips of the branches
bearded; racemes reduced to 1 or 2 joints. Spikelets hairy, greyish; awn
also hairy, up to 1 in. long, yellow in colour.

Nubia (between Suakin and Berber, Wadi Læmeb and Wadi Derumkad, Long.
35° 25′ E.).


858 =Eremopogon foveolatus= _Stapf._

Tufted grass up to 2 ft. high (often under 1 ft.); leaves greyish,
narrow. Panicle narrow, up to 3 in. long, spikelets pinkish, surrounded
by white silky hairs. Awn up to 1½ in. long, kneed, brown.

Red Sea Prov. (maritime plain and up to 3,000 to 4,000 ft. Soturba
range, Lat. 21° N.).


859 =Arthraxon serrulatus= _Hochst._

Perennial grass up to 2 ft. high; stems from a short rhizome. Leaves
broadly lanceolate, 1-2 in. long, ½-¾ in. wide, with cartilaginous
margins, hairy, particularly along the edges and on the sheaths. Racemes
2-5, slender, greenish or suffused with purple, 1¼ to over 2 in. long,
on a short common axis; sessile spikelet narrow with small short teeth
along the edges. Fertile valve awned from low down on the back. Awn up
to over ½ in., fine, kneed about the middle.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma).


860 =Amphilophis pertusa= _Stapf._

Perennial grass up to 2½ ft. high, stems slender. Panicles digitate, up
to 2½ in. long, branches up to 10; racemes whitish or dull purplish with
silky hairs. Sessile spikelets pale green, with a pronounced pit on the
glume, awned; the awn forming a continuation of the valve, 1 in. long,
kneed at the middle.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River, Rejaf road).


=A. insculpta= _Stapf._ =var. vegetior= _Stapf._

Similar to above but with 1-3 pits on the glume of pedicelled spikelets;
sessile spikelets usually olive green or flushed with purple. Leaves
rough and reed-like.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Atbara River (Gerba).


861 =Dichanthium annulatum= _Stapf._ MALHI (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab.

Very tufted perennial grass up to over 3 ft. high, stems many noded.
Leaves narrow, strongly ribbed. Inflorescence digitate, racemes 3-9,
thinly hairy with long silky hairs, pale or flushed with purple; sessile
spikelets of the lowest 1-3 pairs staminate or neuter and awnless; awn
of fertile valve a continuation of the valve, nearly 1 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (near Tokar, Port Sudan, Wadi Yumga, Wadi Læmeb); Kordofan
Prov. (Abu Garad); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Khartoum Prov.;
Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar).


862 =Schizachyrium urceolatum= _Stapf._

Annual up to 1 ft. high, stems slender; leaves very narrow, reddish, the
upper spathe-like, enclosing the racemes. Spikes solitary, joints and
pedicels short, thickened, with a large slipper-like appendage. Awn
about ¾ in. long, from the hollow of the 2-toothed fertile valve, which
is divided to beyond the middle. Racemes smooth, except for a silky tuft
of hairs at the base of the joint. Pedicelled spikelets not larger than
the sessile.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma).


=S. exile= _Stapf._

Annual, stems in bundles, from ½ to 2 ft. high. Leaf blades eventually
pinkish, very narrow, tapering to a fine point, uppermost spathe-like,
enclosing the racemes, which are conspicuously hairy. Joints up to ¼ in.
long, club-shaped, with a oblique minutely toothed membranous appendage,
otherwise as _S. urceolatum_.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); White Nile (J. Arashkol); Kordofan
Prov. (El Obeid); Darfur Prov. (El Fasher); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas Zariba).


=S. Schweinfurthii= _Stapf._

Perennial grass up to 2 ft. high, leaves narrow, tapering. Uppermost
spathe-like. Inflorescence simpler and much less tufted than the
preceding. Fertile valve shortly two toothed, joints very narrow.
Sessile spikelets very close, almost smooth, awned.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Tokuto River).


863 =Diectomis fastigiata= _Kunth._

Annual, up to 5 ft. high; stems slender, kneed at the base; leaves,
narrow, tapering to a fine bristle-like point. Inflorescence enclosed in
a spathe, branches 2 or 3. Pedicelled spikelets larger than sessile,
surrounded by long, soft, white hairs, very different from the sessile.
Awn 1¼-2 in. long, kneed at the middle, twisted, yellow and brown.

Fung Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra 6,000 to 8,000 ft.).


864 =Andropogon tenuiberbis= _Hack._

Tall perennial grass up to 15 ft. high. Leaf blades narrow, over 1 ft.
long, tapering to a fine point. Inflorescence a loose spatheate panicle
up to 2½ ft. long, with about 6, 2-4-rayed tiers. All sessile spikelets
alike, awns from the sinus of the 2-divided fertile valve, joints and
pedicels very narrow and slender.

Bahr El Ghazal (Jur, Geneina, Jur Ghattas, Kutshuk Ali’s Zariba).


=A. linearis= _Stapf._

Perennial up to 3 ft. high, leaves very narrow, sheaths often purplish.
Inflorescence small, partly enclosed in a spathe, awn of sessile
spikelet stout.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, 8,000 ft.).


=A. schirensis= _Hochst._

Perennial grass 3-10 ft. high, leaf blades narrowed, tapering, often 1½
ft. long. Inflorescence consisting of stout racemes in pairs, with
compressed, long awned (as above) spikelets.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Khor Utrab); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).


=A. gayanus= _Kunth,_ =var. genuinus= _Hack._

Tufted perennial grass, from a few feet to 10 ft. high. Leaves narrow,
tapering, leaf sheath often wider than the blade, forming rounded
shoulders at the junction. Inflorescence consisting of racemes in pairs;
spikelets with long, soft, white hairs. Awns ½-¾ in. long. Joints and
pedicels hairy on one side.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).

=var. squamulatus= _Stapf._ As above, but joints and pedicels hairy on
both margins. Awn ¾-1¼ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Upper Nile Prov. (Sobat River,
Nasser); Kordofan (Rahad); Darfur (Jebel Marra, 9,300 ft.).

=var. bisquamulatus= _Hack._ ABU RIKHIS—Arab.

As above, joints and pedicels hairy on one or both margins, spikelets
more or less hidden by silky hairs.

White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid and between Um
Ruaba and Eilafun); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongoland, between Uringama
and Ngoli).


865 =Cymbopogon sennarensis= _Chiov._

Densely tufted perennial up to 3 ft. high, often reddish in colour;
leaves narrow, up to 8 in. long. Inflorescence a spatheate obovoid
panicle, formed of more or less dense balls of racemes which are in
pairs and each surrounded by a spathe. The sessile spikelets at the base
of the spike are different from the rest; the lower glume of female
spikelets with 4 nerves. Awn only ¼ in. long, bristle-like, spikelet
surrounded by long, fine, white hairs.

Fung Prov.


=C. proximus= _Stapf._ MAHAREIB—Arab.

Similar to above, but spatheate panicle narrow, long, much interrupted
below; the lower glume of the fertile spikelets with 2 short nerves. Awn
a fine straight bristle up to ¼ in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (sea coast, Wadi El Omari); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat,
Matamma); Khartoum Prov. (Jebel Royan, Omdurman and Soba); Blue Nile
Prov.; Fung Prov. (Abu Naama); Kordofan Prov. (Jebel Abu Sunun); Darfur
Prov. (E. of El Fasher and Kulme).


=C. near C. proximus= _Stapf._

Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=C. nervatus= _Chiov._ NĀL. HAMAREIB, MARHABEIB, MAHAREIB, and TEITALIB
(Kord)—Arab; SHIREIH (Dilling)—Nuba; NGEINY (Ying)—Nuer.

Annual (?) grass up to 3 ft. high. Panicle narrow, spatheate, similar to
previous species, but lower glume of fertile spikelet with conspicuous
long oil streaks on both ends of the groove.

This grass is much used for thatching. It contains a volatile oil which
has been examined by the Govt. Chemist; vide W.T.R.L. report, 1921.

Widely distributed in plains of Central Sudan.


=C. excavatus= _Stapf._

Perennial 2-4 ft. high. Inflorescence smaller and more open than above,
also darker in colour, oil streaks obscure. Base and adjacent pedicel of
sessile raceme joined together.

Khartoum Prov. (Soba); Blue Nile Prov. (Dinder River).


=C. giganteus= _Chiov._ MARAIRA (Meshra El Zeraf)—Arab; NŪR (Meshra El
Zeraf)—Dinka.

Tall perennial up to 8 ft. high. Inflorescence frequently over 1 ft.
long, very open, spatheate, and clustered as preceding; joints and
pedicels densely hairy; base and adjacent pedicel of sessile raceme
joined; oil streaks confined to upper portion of the lower glume of the
sessile spikelet. Awn up to ½ in. long, bent about the middle.

Kordofan Prov. (Megenas and J. Kōn); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El
Zeraf to Hillet Kaka); Bahr El Ghazal Prov.


866 =Hyparrhenia finitima= _Stapf._

Perennial grass up to 6 ft. high. Inflorescence long, narrow, open,
reddish. Racemes in pairs, dense, enclosed in a narrow, pointed spathe
with reddish hairs. Awns slender, about 1¾ in. long, bent, twisted, and
hairy.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma), Khor Utrub.


=H. rufa= _Stapf._ BURNUS (Rahad River)—Arab.

Perennial grass up to 8 ft. long, tufted. Spatheate panicle large, very
lax; peduncles of racemes up to 2½ in. long, protruding from the tightly
rolled spatheoles; spikelets reddish with reddish short hairs. Awns ¾ to
1¼ in., hairy below the bend. Used for thatching and fencing.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post and Zamarka); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo
land, Kulongo Jm, Jur Ghattas); Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Bahr El Jebel
(Lat. 5° N.).


=H. hirta= _Stapf._ HAMERAI Arab.

Perennial grass up to 3 ft. high, densely tufted; leaf blades very
narrow, from a few inches to 12 in. long. Spatheate panicle up to 12 in.
long, racemes scanty and far apart. Spatheoles very narrow, reddish,
tapering to a long fine point; racemes with white hairs. Awns up to 1
in. long, dark brown.

Nubia (J. Waratab; Wadi Arab, between Suakin and Berber); Red Sea Prov.
(Erkowit, near Khor Ashat); Kordofan Prov. (Khor Abu Habl).


=H. Barteri= _Stapf,_ =var. calvescens= _Stapf._

Annual up to 1 ft. high. Leaves up to 1 ft. by 1/5 in. Spatheate panicle
rather dense, with long slender branches bearing fan-shaped groups of
spatheolate racemes. Awns 2 per raceme pair, up to over 2 in. long,
shortly hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Gigging).


=H. Ruprechtii= _Fourn._

Perennial, up to 10 ft. high, forming dense clumps. Leaves very narrow
and tapering. Spatheate panicle erect, narrow and interrupted,
spatheoles narrow, pointed, up to 3 in. long, reddish; fertile spikelets
over ¼ in. long, oblong. Awns about 3 in. long.

Used for thatching and fencing.

Bahr El Jebel (Shambe and Madi).


=H. macrolepis= _Stapf._

Annual 5-8 ft. high. Inflorescence similar to _H. Ruprechtii_, but
fertile spikelets larger (nearly ½ in. long), and awns up to 5 in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=H. pseudocymbaria= _Stapf._ ANSORA (River Rahad)—Arab.

Annual up to over 3 ft. high, showy by reason of the boat-shaped
spatheoles, which remain after maturity, and enclose the racemes; these
spatheoles are vividly coloured from bright red to yellowish brown. Awns
up to 2½ in. long with brown silky hairs.

Fung Prov. (Roseires and Jongol’s Post); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, 7,500
ft. and Kulme, 3,600 ft.).


=H. cymbaria= _Stapf._

Tall handsome grass, perennial, 6-20 ft. high; leaf blades very narrow.
Spatheate panicle often very large and dense, spatheoles boat-shaped,
coloured vivid red or purple, racemes protruding from the spatheoles;
spikelets hairy, coloured green and purple; awns about ½ in. long.

Darfur (Jebel Marra, 8,000 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land;
Atasilli Brook).


=H. variabilis= _Stapf._

Tall handsome perennial grass up to 10 ft. high. Inflorescence over 1
ft. long, narrow, fairly open, very similar to preceding, but peduncles
rather larger (¼ in.) and sessile spikelets up to nearly ½ in. long,
awns up to 1¼ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=H. confinis= _Anders._

Annual grass, 3 ft. and over high. Inflorescence long, very loose and
open, more or less leafy. Spatheoles boat-shaped, up to 2 in. long,
narrow and tapering. Peduncles about equalling the spatheoles. Awns up
to 3 in. long, stout and twisted. The whole plant light reddish brown.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).

=var. pellita= _Stapf._ Leaves more rigid and narrower than in the type.

Kassala Prov. (Matamma, Gallabat).


=H. macrarrhena= _Stapf._

Handsome annual grass about 3 ft. high. Inflorescence long, very open.
Spatheoles purplish, up to 1½ in. long, narrow, boat-shaped; spikelets
light yellow, hairy; peduncle much shorter than spatheoles. Awns stout,
about 3 in. long. Joints of stem with a spreading beard.

Bahr El Ghazal (Bongo land).


=H. diplandra= _Stapf._

Tall perennial, up to over 12 ft. high, densely tufted from a short
rhizome. Spatheate panicle large, narrow, loose, often over 2 ft. long.
Spatheoles very narrow, 1-1¼ in. long, edges finally inrolled, purplish
or brown in colour. Long spikelets in tufts on long slender peduncles.
Awns finely hairy, 1½-2½ in. long.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Bongo, Tonj River); Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=H. cornucopiæ= _Stapf._

Handsome grass, spatheate panicle leafy, very loose and open, up to 1
ft. high, spatheoles narrowly lanceolate, up to 3 in. long, purplish;
axis of the racemes produced into a cup-like appendage nearly ½ in.
long. Awn stout, up to 4½ in. long, very hairy with short brown hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


867 =Monocymbium ceresiiforme= _Stapf._

Perennial grass 1-4 ft. high; leaves often very hairy. Inflorescence
narrow, loose; racemes solitary, much reduced in size, enclosed in a
larger coloured spatheole which is narrow and boat-shaped. Awns fine, up
to ½ in. long, kneed at and twisted below the middle, not hairy.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo land, Gir & Jur land); Jur Ghattas.


868 =Heteropogon contortus= _Roem._ & _Schult._

Tufted perennial up to over 3 ft. high, leaves narrow, mostly growing
from the base. Inflorescence a single slender terminal raceme, from 1½
to over 6 in. long. Spatheoles narrow, tapering, about ⅓ in. long,
hairy. Awns, stout, kneed, 2 to over 4 in. long, dark brown, often
twisted together.

This grass is known as Spear Grass. It frequently causes trouble to
cattle and horses, as the sharp-pointed seeds stick in the mouth and
penetrate the skin. It forms good hay if cut before it flowers.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra); Nuba Mts.
Prov. (J. Ghulfan); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas and Niamniam
land); Mongalla Prov. (Gemeiza).


869 =Themeda triandra= _Forsk._

Coarse perennial grass 1½-4 ft. high, tufted, often with a layer of
withered fibres at the base. Inflorescence of scanty, scattered,
spatheate panicles and long stalks, resembling tassels. Spatheoles
narrow, purple or red, up to 2 in. long; spikelets much shorter, about ½
in., with long hairs; awns long, black, twisted, stout.

A valuable fodder grass.

Darfur Prov.


870 =Digitaria horizontalis= _Willd._

Annual grass, from one to several feet high; stems tufted, ascending
from a bent, more or less prostrate base, hairy, up to ½ in. wide.
Inflorescence of 4 to many racemes on a common axis (digitate), 1½-6 in.
long, finely hairy. Spikelets continuous, pressed close to the axis, up
to ½ in. long, awnless, lower glume reduced to a small, ovate,
membranous scale; upper 3-nerved with lines of silky hairs between the
hairs on the margins, axis with long, spreading, very fine glistening
hairs.

A good fodder grass.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N.; sea coast, to between 3,000 to 4,000 ft.);
Fung Prov. (Bunzaga); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=D. marginata= _Link._

Annual grass, 1 to over 2 ft. high. Leaves up to ⅓ in. broad, hairy.
Racemes 4-9, digitate, consisting of small spikelets, appressed to the
axils, rather larger than above, also upper glume more pointed.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).

=var. fimbriata= _Stapf._ More silky than above.

Berber Prov.

=var. nubica= _Stapf._ Spikelets smooth, not hairy.

Halfa Prov.; Dongola Prov. (Between Old Dongola and Merowe); Berber and
Khartoum Prov.


=D. gayana= _Stapf._

Annual, 1-4 ft. high. Leaves with coarse pale hairs; racemes 2-6,
digitate. Spikelets up to nearly ⅙ in. long, with a copious silvery or
purplish lateral fringe of hairs, which is produced into a long brush-
like point.

Kordofan Prov. (Um Marba).


=D. xanthotricha= _Stapf._

Annual, 2-3 ft. high, smooth or sparingly hairy. Racemes two, one
sessile, the other shortly peduncled, or 3-4 sessile, digitate.
Spikelets with one transverse and two lateral fringes of brown coloured
or reddish hairs.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=D. ternata= _Stapf._

Annual, stems ½-2 ft. long. Leaves sparingly hairy. Racemes 2-7,
digitate, very slender, 2-6 in. long, with spikelets not so close as in
preceding. Spikelets ½ in. long, ovate, hairy, hairs with thick walls
and club-shaped tips, produced to form a short terminal tuft or beard.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=D. abyssinica= _Stapf._

Perennial grass with a long, slender, creeping, often branching rhizome;
up to 1 ft. high. Leaves smooth, narrow, strongly ribbed. Racemes 2-9,
at the apex of a common axis. Spikelets rather loose, elliptic acute,
1/12 in. long.

A bad weed.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River, Kagulu).


=D. debilis= _Willd._

Annual, springing from a prostrate, branching and rooting base, 1-2 ft.
high. Leaves narrow, small, upper 4 in. by ¼ in., lower 1 in. by ⅛ in.
Racemes 5-11, digitate, pale green. Spikelets rather loose, up to ⅛ in.
long, slender, very pointed, not hairy.

A good fodder grass.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli) Kordofan Prov.


=D. pennata= _Chiov._

Bushy grass up to 3 ft. high (generally smaller), with a short rhizome
producing tufts of fresh growths, covered at the base with white hairy
scales. Stems very slender, wiry, producing barren branches from the
lower, and tufted flowering branches from the upper joints. Racemes 6-10
in a whorl, very slender, up to 5 in. long, digitately arranged.
Spikelets oval, about ⅛ in. long, in pairs, widely spaced, with long
fine spreading hairs.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov.


=D. uniglumis= _Stapf,_ =var. major= _Stapf._

Tall perennial grass up to 10 ft. high. Leaves 2 ft. long and ½ in.
wide. Inflorescence up to 2 ft. long, consisting of racemes (up to 10
in. long), gathered into a panicle. Spikelets small, rarely 1/12 in.
long, oval, closely arranged, glossy chestnut brown in colour.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo; Gurfala; Niamniam-land, near Nganye by the
Ibba River).


=D. intecta= _Stapf._

Annual, up to 3 ft. high. Leaf sheath strongly ribbed, covered with
short stiff hairs. Racemes 8-20, gathered into a brush-like panicle 5-8
in. long. Spikelets very small, about 1/20 in. long, beset with fine
white hairs, glossy chestnut brown in colour.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma).


871 =Alloteropsis semialata= _Hitchcock._

Perennial grass, compactly tufted on a short rhizome, with a thick basal
coat of silky hairy leaf bases or their remains. Stems erect, 1-3 ft.
high. Leaves strongly ribbed, very narrow. Inflorescence mostly of 2-3
racemes, occasionally one, sometimes 3-4, springing from the same joint,
1½-8 in. long. Axis wavy, triangular in section. Spikelets loosely
arranged, tassel-like. Lower floret of papery texture, transparent,
mottled with brown; upper with valve, produced into a fine bristle up to
⅛ in. long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Gendua River).


872 =Eriochloa acrotricha= _Hack._

Tufted annual. Stems leafy, ½ to over 2 ft. long. Inflorescence a narrow
panicle 1½-4 in. long with a few, or up to 10, racemes widely spaced on
the same axis. Spikelets in 2 series, dorsally compressed; lower glume
rudimentary, forming with the base of the stalk a bead-like process,
oval pointed, with a fine bristle, up to ⅙ in. long.

Nubia, Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile
Prov. (J. Arashkol); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra El Zeraf).


873 =Brachiaria dictyoneura= _Stapf._

Perennial 1½-3 ft. high, leaves narrow, sheathing the flower stalk.
Inflorescence consisting of 3-6 widely spaced spike-like racemes, having
the spikelets arranged on one side. Racemes dense, about 2 in. long;
spikelets largish, 1/5 in. long, oval, silkily hairy, often flushed with
purple, lower glume present, almost as long as the spikelet, 11-nerved.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan Prov.


=B. fulva= _Stapf._

Perennial up to 3 ft. high. Leaves narrow. Inflorescence of a similar
type to above, but racemes 4-12, closer spaced, 1¾ in. long, arched,
with reddish or yellowish hairs. Spikelets densely hairy, closely
arranged, about ⅛ in. long, oval.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur. Agada, Bongo land, Matia Addai); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).


=B. stigmatisata= _Stapf._

Annual, over 2 ft. high, ascending from a leafy base. Leaves broad,
narrowly oval with crisped spiny margins, from 1 to over 7 in. long by
¼-½ in. wide. Inflorescence of 1-3 spike-like racemes, widely spaced on
a common axis, ¾-2 in. long. Racemes dense, 1-2½ in. long; spikelets
closely arranged, 1/16 to 1/5 in. long, not hairy, prominently nerved,
pale yellowish.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=B. mutica= _Stapf._

Perennial grass 3-6 ft. high (occasionally 8 ft.). Leaves smooth,
narrow, hairy on the sheaths. Inflorescence 4-8 in. long, consisting of
numerous, sometimes paired racemes 1-3 in. long. Spikelets about ⅛ in.
long, almost touching, oval; stigmas blackish purple, very conspicuous.

A valuable fodder grass.

White Nile Prov. (Lat. 12° 10′ N.); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=B. brizantha= _Stapf._

Perennial, coarse grass up to over 6 ft. high, leaves narrow, up to 15
in. long. Inflorescence one-sided, consisting of 2-8 arching racemes,
widely set apart on a common axis, which is triangular in section.
Racemes usually long, up to 6 in., closely set with rather large (¼ in.
long) swollen spikelets. Lower glume small, conspicuously nerved, often
purple, clasping the spikelet.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam
country, Ibba River, Nganye and Bongo-Land, Gir and Kulongo); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).


=B. callopus= _Stapf._

Annual, over 2 ft. high, copiously rooting from the lower nodes. Leaves
sheathing the flowering stem, narrow, finely hairy inside. Inflorescence
erect, about 6 in. long, of 6-8 erect, one-sided, almost equally distant
racemes. Axis sharply triangular, racemes dense, 2-ranked, 2 in. long
(the lowest), to ⅔ in. long (the upper). Spikelets touching, elliptic,
acute, pale straw coloured, definitely stalked, stalk globose.

Bahr El Ghazal Prov. (Bongo land: Gir).


=B. obtusiflora= _Stapf._ UM KHIRR—Arab; AJOAK—Dinka.

Annual up to 6 ft. high, stems stout. Leaves narrow, generally smooth.
Inflorescence up to over 6 in. long, very loose, consisting of 5-8
dense, spike-like racemes widely spaced on a common axis. Racemes 2-3
in. long; spikelets stalked, ½ in. long, ellipsoid in shape, swollen,
pale yellow.

A good fodder grass, the ripe seeds are edible.

Red Sea Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Khor Abu Habl, Wad El Ghall, 40 miles S.
of Abu Zabbad); Upper White Nile Prov. (Goz el Siada).


=B. regularis= _Stapf._

Annual, rarely over 1½ ft. high, stems leafy; leaves broad (up to ½ in.)
and up to 6 in. long, tapering to a fine point. Inflorescence a loose
panicle of 5 to many lax racemes, which are about 2-3 in. long.
Spikelets long stalked, loosely scattered, small, elliptic.

Nubia (Shores of the Red Sea at Mirza Eleri, Lat. 22° 12′ N.L., Wadi
Dimehadit, between Suakin and Berber); Fung Prov. (Shellal); Kordofan
Prov. (Um Ruaba); Darfur Prov. (Suruj District and Kulme).


=B. glauca= _Stapf._

Perennial (?), 1 to almost 2 ft. high, densely tufted on a short
rhizome, pale green, stems slender. Leaves narrow, tapering.
Inflorescence 3-5 in. long, of 3-9 racemes, 1-1½ in. long at the base,
the upper shorter. Spikelets broad oblong, slightly swollen, about ⅛ in.
long, fairly closely set.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Wadi Omareg, Sinkat).


=B. leersioides= _Stapf._

Annual, 1-2 ft. high, whole plant pale green, tufted, stems leafy,
leaves narrow, tapering. Inflorescence up to 6 in. long, very lax,
racemes 4-12, widely spaced, short (1½ in. long). Spikelets fairly
dense, on a wavy slightly hairy axis, about ⅛ in. long, rather narrow,
stalked.

Nubia; Red Sea Prov. (Wadi Omareg, Sinkat).


=B. Isachne= _Stapf._ DEFERA, EL KURDA (Kordn)—Arab.

Annual, 1-2 ft. high, loosely tufted, with fine fibrous roots and
slender spreading stems. The leaves are smooth, occasionally hairy, 1-2
in. long, by ¼-⅓ in. broad. The inflorescence is an erect narrow
panicle, 2-3 in. long of 5-12 erect racemes, which are pressed to the
axis and are ½-1 in. long; the spikelets are small, 1/16 in. long, all
arranged on one side, and closely packed in two rows, pale green or
purplish in colour, with very short stalks, which are softly hairy; the
lower glume is reduced to a minute nerveless scale.

A good fodder grass (not the common Defera, see No. 877).

Widely distributed.


=B. epaleata= _Stapf._

Annual, up to 1½ ft. high. Leaves fairly broad, tapering to a point, 2-4
in. by 1/6-5/12 in., margins crisped, cartilaginous. Panicle very loose,
2½-4 in. by 1-2 in., of 6-8 moderately distant racemes. Spikelets widely
set on racemes, which are 1½-3 in. long, stalks ⅛ in. long; lower glume
⅓ to ½ length of the spikelet, distinctly nerved.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat and Metamma).


=B. Kotschyana= _Stapf._

Annual, ½ to over 2 ft. high, stems rather stout and leafy; leaves broad
at the base and tapering to a point, 1-3 in. by 1/6-5/12 in., stiff and
somewhat succulent, margins cartilaginous, minutely spiny, markedly
crisped. Panicle up to over 6 in. long, loose, consisting to 6 to many
oblique, moderately distant racemes, the lowest ½ to over 3 in., the
upper gradually shortening. Spikelets in clusters, which are separated
by about their own length, lower glumes purple.

Kordofan Prov. (J. Kōn); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).


=B. jubata= _Stapf._

Kordofan Prov.


874 =Paspalum auriculatum= _Presl._

Probably perennial grass up to over 1½ ft. high; leaves broad, rounded
at the base, tapering to a fine point, 6-8 in. by ⅓-1 in. Inflorescence
of 3 racemes, with sometimes a fourth from the base of the peduncle, 1-2
in. long, axis winged at sides. Racemes 1½-3 in. long; spikelets
2-ranked crowded, ovate, ⅛ in. long, brown, smooth, conspicuously flat
on one side, which side is turned from the axis. Lower glume absent.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land; Tuhami’s Zariba).


=P. scrobiculatum= _Linn._ =var. Commersonii= _Stapf._

Perennial, 1 to over 2 ft. high. Leaves narrow, up to 9 in. by ⅓ in.,
from an equally wide or slightly narrowed base. Inflorescence of mostly
2, less often 3 or 1, very rarely 4, spike-like racemes at the end of a
flattened common axis. Racemes hairy at the base, from 1-2 in. long.
Spikelets 2-ranked, mostly back to back, roundly ovate, dull brown in
colour, lower glume absent.

A fodder grass, but reputed unwholesome at the time of ripening.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat Metamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr el
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Niamniam land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


875 =Paspalidium desertorum= _Stapf._

Tufted perennial, springing from a hard, stout, brownish, creeping
rhizome; stems many jointed, often trailing, throwing up leafy branches
with swollen joints. Leaves smooth, grey-green in colour, and covered
with a waxy bloom, narrow from an equally wide base, tapering to a
point. Inflorescence from 1 to 6 in. long, of a varying number of short,
spike-like racemes pressed close to the axis, rather widely spaced
below, closer above. Racemes slender, 2 ranked; spikelets numerous,
ovate, acute, touching, about ⅛ in. long, sometimes tinged with purple,
falling at maturity. Lower glume developed.

A desert grass.

Red Sea Prov. (Wadi Omari, Wadi Yumga); Berber Prov. (Walad el Assal);
Kordofan Prov.


876 =Urochloa trichopus= _Stapf._

Annual, forming small tufts, 1-3 ft. high; leaves fairly broad,
sheathing at the base, tapering to an acute point, 2½-6 in. by ½-6 in.,
pale, smooth with hairy margins, or sometimes hairy all over.
Inflorescence of 4-9 erect, often slightly bent, plump, one-sided
racemes. Racemes very dense, 2-ranked, up to 2½ in. long. Spikelets very
close, overlapping, broad ovate, over ⅙ in. long, pale green. Glumes
papery, hairy, lower glume developed.

Very similar to _Brachiaria_, but distinguished by the arrangement of
the spikelets, and by the presence of a short fine point from the obtuse
apex of the fertile valve.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Haraza, Katul Gambara).


=U. pullulans= _Stapf._

Perennial, from a short rhizome covered with thin yellowish scales,
stems erect, up to 3 ft. Leaves often hairy, rather broad in the well
developed specimens, base broad, clasping, tapering to a fine point.
Inflorescence of 5-10 (sometimes fewer), spikelike, one-sided racemes,
2-3½ in. long. Spikelets elliptic-oblong, often purplish, axis wavy.
Glumes membranous, the lower almost as long as the upper; the short
sharp point of the fertile valve conspicuous, not very hairy in Sudan
specimens.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin-Tokar road).


=U. Helopus= _Stapf._

Annual, tufted grass, 1-2 ft. high. Leaves pale, hairy, up to ½ in. wide
by up to 6 in. long. Lance-shaped. Inflorescence of 4-7, erect, rather
stiff, 2-ranked racemes, 1-2 in. long. Spikelets oval, sharply pointed,
strongly ribbed, rather swollen, lower glume less than ½ the length of
the spikelet.

Dongola Prov. Nubian Desert.


=U. insculpta= _Stapf._

Annual, grass up to 4-5 ft. high, growing in scanty tufts. Leaves broad
and round at the base, long tapering to a slender point, up to 9 in.
long, and 1 in. wide, pale, very slightly, if at all, hairy along the
edges. Inflorescence borne on a slender stalk, brush-like, consisting of
many (sometimes reduced to 5 or 6), erect, crowded racemes, 1-3 in.
long. Spikelets up to ⅛ in. long (elliptic in shape, with a short strong
point), finely hairy. Lower glume ⅓ to ½ the length of the spikelet,
with 3-5 nerves.

A good fodder grass.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Metamma); Fung Prov. (Disa); Bahr el Ghazal
Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=U. reptans= _Stapf._

Prostrate or creeping grass, throwing up stems from the rooting joints
of the long decumbent base, the erect stems up to 1½ in. high. Leaves
broad, lance-shaped, up to 2½ in. long and ¾ in. broad, rounded at the
base, acutely pointed at the tip. Inflorescence from 1-3 in. long,
consisting of a few up to 12 obliquely erect, slender one-sided racemes
about 1 in. long, which are fairly widely placed on the axis. Spikelets
small (1/12 in.), often purplish, elliptic (lower glume very small). A
good fodder grass.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


877 =Echinochloa colona= _Link._ DEFERA or DIFERA—Arab.

Annual, growing in small spreading tufts. Leaves sometimes hairy,
narrow, often with dark purple cross bands. Inflorescence up to 5 in.
long, narrow, consisting of few to 6 widely spaced short branches.
Spikelets crowded, often purplish, ovate or elliptic, sharply pointed,
5-7-nerved, minutely hairy between the nerves. Grain 1/16 in. long,
broad elliptic in outline.

One of the best fodder grasses.

Widely distributed in Northern and Central Sudan, including Darfur.


=E. Crus Pavonis= _Schult._ KUZ—Nuer; KAM (or AKAM) (Bahr el
Jebel)—Dinka.

Annual up to 5 ft. high, with copious plump root fibres. Stems erect, up
to ¼ in. thick, spongy below. Leaves 5-15 in. long, and up to 1¼ in.
wide, from a narrowed base, and tapering to a fine point. Inflorescence
erect, large (4-12 in. long), lance-shaped, rather feathery; lower
branches up to 4 in. long, dense. Spikelets nearly ⅛ in. long, narrow,
strongly ribbed, glumes shortly awned (⅛ in.) from the entire acute tip,
minutely hairy, purplish or dark in colour.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land).


=E. pyramidalis= _Hitchcock_ and _Chase._ UM SUF—Arab; KUZ—Nuer; KAM (or
AKAM) (Bahr el Jebel)—Dinka.

Perennial, reed-like grass up to 15 ft. high. Stems ascending from a
long thick abundantly rooting, often floating base. Leaves narrow, 1-2
ft. long by ¼-1 in. broad, flat, narrow at the base, long tapering to a
point, the lower sheathing portion coarsely bearded. Inflorescence erect
or somewhat nodding, up to over 1 ft. long, rather narrow, dense,
branches numerous, 1-6 in. long. Spikelets ovate, up to ⅙ in. long, very
crowded, often coloured blackish purple, awnless, but strongly tipped.
Axis hairy with long silky hairs.

One of the common plants of the Sudd region. A good fodder grass, the
grain is sometimes used for food.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, Niurnya, 6,500 ft.);
Kordofan Prov. (Birket Rahad); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Bongo, Tonj,
Niamniam land); Upper Nile Prov. (Tonga); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River,
Bor, Mongalla); Bahr el Jebel (Lat. 7° 25 N. and 8° 30 N.).


=E. stagnina= _P. Beauv._ HELEW—Arab.

Stout perennial grass, rising to 6 ft. from long creeping and copiously
rooting rhizomes; leaves narrow, long tapering to a fine point, up to 1½
ft. long by 1 in. wide, very rough upwards. Inflorescence up to 10 in.
long, nodding, narrow and often open, branches dense. Spikelets up to ¼
in. long, plump, tapering at both ends, awns up to 1 in. long (often
less).

An excellent fodder.

Red Sea Prov. (near Tokar); Blue Nile Prov. (Sherif); Upper White Nile
Prov. (Mouth of Sobat River); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Shambe, Meshra El
Rek & Jur Ghattas).


878 =Acroceras amplectens= _Stapf._

Annual grass, 2-2½ ft. high, stems ascending from a prostrate and
rooting base, or sometimes floating in water. Lower portion of leaf,
i.e., leaf sheath, strongly developed, prominently striate. Leaf blades
narrow, from a broad clasping rounded base, tapering to a fine point,
3-6 in. long by ¼ to ½ in. at the base. Inflorescence very long and
slender, consisting of 4-6 long, slender, branches, widely spaced.
Spikelets large (¼ in.), narrow, stalked, distantly placed, pressed to
the axis, pale in colour, bluntly pointed.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


879 =Oplismenus Burmannii= _P. Beauv._

Annual, up to 1½ ft. high, stems very slender, ascending from a long
prostrate rambling and rooting base. Leaf sheaths loose and very hairy,
blades hairy, lance-shaped, narrowed at the base and tapered to a fine
point, ¾-2 in. long by ⅙-½ in. wide. Inflorescence very narrow, 1-3 in.
long, consisting of 3-8 small branches ½ in. long. Spikelets crowded,
very hairy, glumes awned from the slightly notched tip, awn fine, about
½ in. long.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Abu Gurun’s Zariba).


880 =Panicum Meyerianum= _Nees._

Perennial, about 3 ft. high; stems rigid, hairy at the joints. Leaf
sheaths long, clasping the stem, pale green or straw coloured, blades
narrow, lance-shaped, from a contracted base, 3-8 in. by ¼-½ in.
Inflorescence an open panicle 3-6 in. long, lower branches 2-3 in. long.
Spikelets rather crowded, ovate, ⅛ in. long, often tinged with purple,
pedicels very short. Glumes very different, lower minute, upper
membranous, faintly 5 nerved, fertile valve minutely pointed.

Between Berber and Khartoum; Blue Nile Prov. (Dinder mouth); Fung Prov.
(Singa); Kordofan Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Bor).


=P. maximum= _Jacq._

Perennial, grass up to 10 ft. high, densely tufted. Stems stout, hairy
at the joints. Leaves often thinly covered with long fine hairs, narrow,
little contracted at the base. Inflorescence an erect or nodding open
panicle, from ½ to over 1½ ft. long, lower branches in a whorl, up to 1
ft. long, flowering in the upper half. Spikelets widely set, stalked, up
to ⅙ in. long, shiny light green or tinged with purple. Lower glume ¼ to
⅓ length of spikelet, upper same size as spikelet.

This grass is often called Guinea Grass, and is cultivated as a fodder
in various parts of the tropics.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land, Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=P. trichocladum= _Hack._

Perennial, rambling or climbing up to 8 ft. Stems slender, many jointed,
branched, forming a dense mass, roots often found in swamps or standing
water. Leaf sheaths long, often breaking away from the stem, blades
spreading horizontally, lance-shaped from a very contracted base, 1½-6
in. by ¼-½ in. Panicle very loose and rather scanty, 2-6 in. by 2-3 in.,
branches slender, very wavy. Spikelets widely set, often long stalked,
up to ⅛ in. Lower glume very small.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=P. carinifolium= _Stapf._

Perennial, 4-5 ft. high. Leaves long, narrow towards the base with
recurved margins and a much projecting midrib. Inflorescence fairly
dense, rather irregular, 4-5 in. by 1-2 in., branches very slender.
Spikelets rather swollen, very small, prominently ribbed.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. fulgens= _Stapf._

Perennial, up to 2 ft. high, forming large tufts. Leaves very narrow,
2-5 in. by 1-12 to ⅛ in. Panicle erect, fairly loose and open, 2½-5 in.
by 1-1½ in. Spikelets smooth with a conspicuous bronze lustre, almost
globose, very small.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=P. Dregeanum= _Nees._

Perennial, compactly tufted, with a coat of persistent leaf bases, 1-4
ft. high. Leaves very narrow, up to 9 in. long by 1/12 to 1/5 in. wide,
tapering to a slender point. Panicle fairly dense, brush-like, 3-7 in.
by 1½-3 in. Spikelets about ⅛ in. long, purplish, more or less gaping.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. aphanoneurum= _Stapf._

Perennial, densely tufted, 4-7 ft. high, stems stout, reed-like. Leaves
½ to 1½ ft. by ⅙-½ in., narrow from an equally wide base, tapering.
Panicle rather loose, ½ to over 1 ft. by 2-5 in., irregularly branched
at the base. Spikelets widely gaping; tinged with purple, upper glume
faintly 5-nerved.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Bongo land, Dukutu, River Roah).


=P. callosum= _Hochst._

Annual, up to 3 ft. high, stems slender. Leaves narrow from an
attenuated base, up to over 1½ ft. by ¼-5/12 in., often finely hairy.
Panicles broom-like, open, loose and narrow, often over 1 ft. long.
Spikelets large, elliptic, ¼ in. long, on long fine stalks up to ¾ in.
long.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat Metamma).


=P. sociale= _Stapf._

A delicate annual, up to almost 1 ft. high, growing in dense stands,
finely hairy all over. Leaves erect, 1-1½ in. by ⅛-⅙ in., yellowish
green. Panicles 2-3 in. by 1½ in., widely open. Spikelets ⅛ in. long,
upper floret dark chestnut brown to black, finely polished, forming a
false fruit.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma).


=P. atrosanguineum= _Hochst._

A tufted annual grass from a few inches to over 1 ft. high, hairy all
over except the panicle. Leaves lance-shaped from a rounded base, 1-4
in. by ⅙-⅓ in. Panicle very open and spreading, 3-6 in. by 1½-3 in.
Spikelets elliptic, minutely pointed, purple.

Nubian Desert; Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=P. haplocaulos= _Pilger._

Annual about 1 ft. high, growing in close stands. Stems very slender.
Leaves very narrow and pointed. Panicles reduced to a common axis and
1-3 widely spaced branches each bearing 1-4 spikelets. Spikelets 1/9 in.
long, striate.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. turgidum= _Forsk._ TUMAM & ABU RUKBA—Arab; SHUSH—Hadendowa.

Bushy grass up to 4 ft. high with stout roots and hard rigid stems, and
having secondary shoots springing from the joints. Leaves very variable
in size, tapering to a fine point, those supporting branches soon drying
and becoming straw coloured. Panicles variable in size, often scanty,
branches slender, spikelets about ⅙ in. long, ovoid, tapering; glumes
membranous, ribbed.

Widely distributed in North and Central Sudan and Darfur.


=P. repens= _Linn._

Perennial up to 2 (rarely 4 ft.) high; rhizome long, creeping stem very
leafy, many jointed; leaves very narrow, sharply pointed, hairy at the
base, folded inwards. Panicle 3-8 in. long, loose; branches 2-6 in.
long. Spikelets 1/12-1/10 in. Said to be good fodder plant and also
useful as a sandbinder.

Bahr el Jebel (Hillet el Nuer).


=P. porphyrrhizos= _Steud._

Perennial up to over 3 ft. high, densely tufted on a short rhizome.
Leaves narrow, long tapering to a hard slender point. Panicles large and
loose, slender, spikelets 1/10-1/6 in. long, with a long slender point,
green or often tinged with purple.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat Metamma); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli).


=P. coloratum= _Linn._

Tufted perennial grass up to 4 ft. high. Stems stout, often shortly
creeping at the base before ascending. Leaves 3-12 in. by ¼-½ in.,
tapering. Panicle open, composed of long slender branches, bearing
scattered spikelets on slender pedicels. Spikelets small 1/12-1/8 in.,
moderately gaping, green or tinged with purple.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=P. hygrocharis= _Steud._

Annual tufted grass up to 2 ft. high. Stems slender, soft, bent at the
joints, leafy. Leaves narrow from a rounded base, shortly tapering to a
rather hard point. Panicles 3-5 in. long, rather loose and sometimes
spreading, branches fairly stout, up to 3 in. long, wavy. Spikelets
acutely pointed, tips cut off square, green, stalked.

Found in dried up rain pools.

Kordofan (Abu Gerad).


881 =Sacciolepis ciliocincta= _Stapf._

Annual, growing in colonies up to 1½ ft. high, stems very erect, spongy
in texture, about ⅙ in. diameter. Leaf blades stiff and erect, mostly
overtopping the inflorescence, linear from a narrowed base, tapering to
a hard point. Inflorescence erect, straight, rather cylindric, about 1
in. long, very compact, bearded, attenuated downwards, branches fused
with the axis against which the pedicels are crowded; spikelets
laterally compressed, upper glume 7-nerved with a line of hairs along
each side of the keel and margins.

Bahr el Ghazal (Jur Ghattas).


=S. micrococca= _Mez._

Annual, growing in tufts or clumps up to 2½ ft. high, stems very slender
from a stouter base, leaf blades very narrow, folded, almost bristle-
like, up to 6 in. long. Inflorescence long, narrow, cylindric, 2½-5 in.
long by 1/12-1/8 in. broad, dense. Spikelets crowded, swollen, 1/24 in.
long, olive green or brown, glumes nerved.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. interrupta= _Stapf._

Perennial from a short, stout, creeping rhizome, up to 5 ft. high, stems
at the base copiously rooted from the nodes, sheathed all along. Leaves
narrow, tapering, up to 12 in. long by ¼-½ in. wide, flat, soft,
somewhat plump. Inflorescence at first sheathed by leaves, finally
protruding, from the few inches to over 1 ft. by ¼-⅓ in., dense.
Spikelets slightly compressed, not gaping, up to over ⅛ in., yellowish-
green, with darker or brownish tips.

Upper White Nile (Tonga); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla
Prov. (Yei River).


=S. typhura= _Stapf._

Perennial, tufted from a short rhizome, up to 3 ft. high. Stems erect,
slender, leaves narrow, 6-12 in. by 1/8-5/12 in. Inflorescence erect,
5-10 in. by ¼ in., very dense. Spikelets more or less hairy, very dark
in colour.

Bahr el Ghazal. (Jur Agada).


882 =Setaria verticillata= _P. Beauv._ LUSEIG—Arab.

Annual grass with erect leafy stems, more or less branched and varying
in height from 1-5 ft. Leaves are thin, flat, sparsely hairy, base
usually narrowed, tapering to a fine point, 4-10 in. long and ¼-¾ in.
broad. The inflorescence is cylindric, coarsely bristly, spikelets
having more than one bristle, the barbs of which are reversed making
inflorescence rough upwards.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar); Berber Prov.; Fung Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Zalingei
3,100 ft.).


=S. ambigua= _Stapf._

Annual grass 1-2 ft. high, with rather weak jointed stem. Leaves long
and narrow, 12 in. by ⅓ in., base narrowed. The inflorescence is
cylindric, but is interrupted, forming two or more lobes. The spikelets
are greenish with 3 or more short bristles which are smooth to the feel
upwards, i.e., barbs erect. Grain tightly enclosed in hardened glume,
about 1/6 in. long.

Khartoum Prov.


=S. viridis= _P. Beauv._

Annual grass 1-2 ft. high with slender leafy stems. Leaves very finely
pointed from a rounded base, up to 4 in. long by ⅓ in. Inflorescence
cylindric, up to 2 in. long, not lobed, bristles spreading, 3 or more to
a spikelet, with erect barbs, spikelets greenish, grain elliptic, 1/12
in. long.

Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov.


=S. rubiginosa= _Miq._

Annual grass of variable character, up to 2 ft. high. Leaves narrow,
finely pointed, rounded at the base. Inflorescence dense, cylindric,
narrow, yellow. Bristles more than one to spikelet, smooth to touch
upwards. Grain large, up to ⅛ in., rather swollen.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Kordofan
Prov. (Khor Abu Habl); White Nile Prov. (Meshra el Zeraf); Bahr el
Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=S. lasiothyrsa= _Stapf._

Annual grass up to 2 ft. high with slender erect stems; coarsely hairy
all over. Leaves long and narrow, up to 1 ft. by ⅓ in. Inflorescence up
to 12 in. long, loose, with many fine, hairy branches up to 2½ in. long.
Spikelets with one bristle, glumes flushed with purple and yellow.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Bongo land, Mashir Hills).


=S. anceps= _Stapf._ =var. sericea.=

Perennial up to 3 ft. high, densely tufted on a short rhizome. Basal
leaves overlapping and arranged fan-like, upper leaves narrow, up to 6
in. long and ¼ in. wide, tapering, tightly folded. Inflorescence a
continuous and very dense cylindrical false spike (somewhat resembling a
bottle brush) 4-10 in. long. Bristles more than one at the base of the
spikelet, fine, silky, bright yellow in colour. Spikelets clustered 1/12
in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=S. aurea= _A. Braun._ SANGALA (N. Kordn); DANAB EL KELB (M. el Zeraf);
HALFA (Fung and Kordn)—Arab; ALLOK (M. el Zeraf)—Dinka.

Strong-growing erect grass about 3 ft. high, with slender stems from a
short rhizome which is covered with the remains of old scales and
sheaths. Leaves long, narrow, tapering ½-1½ in. by ⅛-⅓ in., usually
flat. Inflorescence erect, straight, up to 1 ft. long. Bristles more
than one at the base of each spikelet, and exceeding spikelet by 1/12
in., yellowish to bright orange or reddish in colour. Spikelets
clustered, ⅛ in. long. A good fodder grass.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Mittu-land Kaffuluku);
Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=S. Schweinfurthii= _Herrm._

Perennial, stems stiffly erect, up to 4 ft. high; leaves very narrow
from a narrowed base, up to over 2 ft. by ¼ in., tapering to a long
bristle-like point, densely hairy at the base with white hairs.
Inflorescence an erect, very dense continuous cylindrical false spike
5-6 in. by ¼ in. inclusive of the bristles. Bristles more than one (up
to 12) to the spikelet, reddish yellow. Spikelets solitary, or rarely a
cluster of 2.

Bahr el Ghazal (Jur Ghattas).


=S. lancea= _Stapf._

Leafy annual up to 2 ft. high, stems slender, rather weak and flattened.
Leaves tapering at both ends, 5-10 in. by ½-1 in. (at broadest part),
thin, flat, plaited downwards fan-fashion. Inflorescence loose, panicle-
like, 4-6 in. long, axis hairy. Spikelets with one slender bristle at
base, elliptic, about ⅛ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Mongalla).


=S. sp. (sp. nov.?).=

Stout annual grass about 3 ft. high, stems slender, erect, tapering both
ways, folded into ridges downwards, up to 12 in. long by ½ in. wide.
Inflorescence open, panicle-like, up to 10 in. long, branches not hairy.
Spikelets with one slender bristle from the base, both ultimately
purplish or dark in colour, or at least flushed with purple.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=S. sulcata= _Raddi._

A coarse perennial from 4-12 ft. high with stout stems. Leaves large,
tapering at both ends, plaited downwards fan-wise, up to 2 ft. by 1½-2
in., hairy. Inflorescence a rather dense panicle up to 12 in. long,
branches fine, up to 3 in. long, with rough margins. Spikelets with a
single bristle at the base, about ⅛ in. long.

A good fodder grass.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River); Bahr el Ghazal
Prov. (near Gumango Hill and Boddo River).


883 =Tricholæna rosea= _Nees._

Perennial or annual grass, stems loosely tufted, bent at the joints, up
to 1½ ft. high. Leaves narrow, 2-8 in. by 1/12-⅓ in. long, tapering to a
very fine point, sometimes tinged with red. Inflorescence a loose
panicle 3-6 in. long, spikelets in tufts surrounded by fine, long, silky
hairs without tubercles at the base, the whole often very pinkish in
colour, upper glume frequently shortly awned, and swollen at or below
the middle.

A good fodder grass.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar and Erkowit); Nubia (Between Korosko and Berber);
Fung Prov. (Abdin); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land).


=T. sphacelata= _Benth._

Perennial grass up to 3 ft. high, stems creeping at the base, and
rooting from the nodes. Leaves rather scanty, long, tapering to a very
fine tip. Inflorescence a loose panicle up to 6 in. long (larger than
_T. rosea_). Spikelets (more swollen at the base than _T. rosea_) and
surrounded by long white or pink, silky hairs, those on the outer glumes
being tubercular at the base.

A good fodder grass.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=T. leucantha= _Hochst._

Perennial grass up to 2 ft. high, stems wiry, sometimes branched from
the base. Panicle up to 4 in. long, loose and somewhat scaly, often
narrow. Spikelets narrow, not basally swollen, lanceolate, generally
whitish, hairs long, white, silky, not tubercular at the base.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N.).


=T. micrantha= _Schrad._

Tufted perennial with wiry stems, up to 2 ft. high. Panicle narrow, up
to 3 in. long. Spikelets less hairy than above species, hairs tubercular
at the base, outer glumes broader than _T. leucantha_, generally white
in colour.

Red Sea Prov. (South of Tokar).


884 =Melinis minutiflora= _P. Beauv._

Perennial grass up to 3 ft. high, ascending from a prostrate, slender,
much branched base. The whole plant is finely hairy with glandular
hairs. Leaves 2-6 in. long by 1/5 to ⅓ in. broad, fine tapering. Panicle
4-8 in. long, narrow, axis and branches very slender, branchlets and
stalks of spikelets hair-like. Spikelets 1/12 in. long, purplish, awn
fine, ½ in. long.

Recommended as an excellent fodder grass. The glandular hairs secrete an
oil which smells rather like Cummin; this is said to be repellant to the
tse-tse fly.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River District).


885 =Anthephora elegans= _Schrad._

Perennial or annual grass up to 4 ft. high, stems erect, stout, striate.
Leaves very narrow, long tapering; ligule prominent, scale-like.
Inflorescence a long, narrow, cylindrical spike. Clusters of spikelets
spiny with outer glumes hardened and scale-like, pressed against central
axis. Spikelets smooth, pale green or yellow.

A useful fodder grass.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=A. Hochstetteri= _Nees._

Perennial, similar in habit to above. Rhizome very short. Spike dark
coloured, glumes narrower, tailed and hairy.

Nubia (between Korosko and Berber); Fung Prov. (opposite Zamarka).


886 =Pennisetum polystachyum= _Schult._

Erect, handsome, annual grass about 2 ft. tall. Spikes up to 6 in. long,
cylindrical, continuous, with bristles up to 1½ in. in diameter,
purplish-brown in colour. Anther tips not bearded, bristles slender, all
free to the base, the inner copiously hairy.

A good fodder grass.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas);
Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=P. near P. polystachyum= _Schultes._

Similar to above, spikes smaller, more compressed.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Darfur Prov. (J. Marra, (9,000 ft.).


=P. pedicellatum= _Trin._

Erect, handsome, annual grass about 2½ ft. high; spikes 2-5 in. long,
cylindrical, more or less interrupted, the spikelets being in small
clusters. Bristles copious, fine, densely hairy.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol);
Kordofan Prov. (Obeid to Mulbes); Darfur Prov.; Mongalla Prov. (Bari
country).


=P. cf. P. pedicellatum= _Trin._

Similar to above, spikelets densely hairy, clusters large.

Darfur Prov. (Zalingei).


=P. Schweinfurthii= _Pilger._

Erect grass with stout stems and strongly ribbed leaves about 1 in.
broad, long tapering to a fine point. Inflorescence at first enclosed in
a sheath, finally up to 6 in. long, interrupted. Spikelets in clusters
of 3-12, glumes hard, chaffy, with blunt ends. Bristles few, rough.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=P. pentastachyum= _Hochst._

Tall annual grass with stout stems up to 4-5 ft. high. Spike
cylindrical, up to 6 in. long (variable). Bristles feathery, not much
exceeding the spikelets, which are long stalked.

Kordofan Prov.


=P. orientale= _Rich._

Perennial 2-6 ft. high, erect or ascending from a densely tufted, often
stout, creeping rootstock. Spike 5-16 in. long, more or less lax.
Bristles much longer than the spikelet, fine, feathery, purplish.
Spikelets sessile or shortly stalked.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N.).


=P. unisetum= _Benth._ MUGHREIB (Fung)—Arab.

Perennial, 3-12 ft. high, branched particularly from the upper joints,
leaf sheaths conspicuously long. Inflorescence very loose and feathery.
Racemes numerous, ½-2 in. long, on very slender stalks. Spikelets
single, overlapping, one bristle at the base of each, rough, not
feathery.

Blue Nile Prov.; Fung Prov. (Roseires, J. Moya and Jongol’s Post);
Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Red Sea Prov. (Tokar); White Nile
Prov. (J. Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (J. Marra 9,200 ft.);
Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=P. ovale= _Rupr._ GASH EL NAL—Arab.

Perennial about 2 ft. high, erect from a stoutish rootstock, lower stem
deeply channelled. Spike resembling a bottle brush, up to 4 in. long,
bristles stout, rough, up to 1 in. long, several to a spikelet.
Spikelets single on axis. Glume 5- or more nerved.

Red Sea Prov. (Suakin and Tokar); Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma);
Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); White Nile Prov. (Hillet Abbas); Upper White
Nile Prov. (Kodok); Bahr el Jebel (Bari land).


=P. purpureum= _Schum._

Tall perennial grass up to 20 ft. high, spreading by creeping
underground stems; spikelets arranged round a densely hairy central axis
forming a compact, erect, bristly cylindrical spike which becomes bent
at maturity; spike up to 1 ft. long. Anther tips minutely hairy.

This grass is known as Elephant Grass or Napier’s Fodder. It is
occasionally cultivated for fodder. It is also used for building and
fencing.

Mongalla Prov. (near Yei River); Bahr el Jebel (Madi).


=P. typhoideum= _Rich._ DUKHN—Arab.

Annual up to 6 ft. high, stems erect, stout. Inflorescence a cylindrical
dense spike up to 8 in. long, purplish. Grain when ripe, nearly round,
yellow.

Cultivated as a food crop in most parts of the country. It is commonly
known as Bulrush Millet.


=P. mollissimum= _Hochst._ GUNGARA (Fung), EL LUINDA (Kord)—Arab.

Annual grass up to 3 ft. high, often branched above. Leaf sheaths very
hairy. Inflorescence cylindrical, up to 4 in. long, often purplish, very
dense. Bristles silky, feathery, very numerous. Axis densely hairy.

Blue Nile Prov.; White Nile Prov. (El Dueim); Kordofan Prov. (Takari).


=P. cenchroides= _Rich._ HESKANIT, & DANAB EL KELB—Arab; WIGAR (?)—Nuer.

Perennial grass, stems often bending upwards from a prostrate base, up
to 2 ft. long. Inflorescence dense, cylindrical, 1-4 in. long, often
purplish. Bristles copious, stiffer than preceding with the bases
thickened into a disc. Anther tip free from hairs.

Note.—Differs from true Heskanit (see 887) in that the spines are not
rigid.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit and Tokar); Berber Prov. (Wadi el Arab & Kokreb);
Khartoum Prov. (Jebel Royan); Blue Nile Prov. (Sheikh Talha); Fung Prov.
(Bunzaga); White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Darfur
Prov.


887 =Cenchrus catharticus= _Del._ HESKANIT & KOREIB—Arab.

Annual, variable in height (up to 2 ft.). Inflorescence cylindrical, up
to 4 in. long. Spikelets surrounded by bristles which are hardened into
rigid spines and united at the base to form a cup. Spines at the base
widely spreading.

Widely distributed in Northern and Central Sudan.


=C. biflorus= _Roxb._ ARDIAKH—Rashida, KUREIT—Hadendowa.

Annual grass similar to above but smaller, basal spines not spreading.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar); Between Suakin and Berber (Wadi el Omari, Jebel
Okurr and Wadi Laemab); Blue Nile Prov. (Wadi el Haddad).


=C. macrostachys= _Hochst._

Similar in habit to above but much larger. Spines long, fine, flexuous,
sometimes dark purple, united into a hard cup at the base.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar); Between Suakin and Berber (Wadi Eremit); Kordofan
Prov. (Abu Gerad).


888 =Trichopteryx gigantea= _Stapf._

Tall perennial grass 5-12 ft. high, stems stout, rough to the touch;
leaves long, narrow, ½-1 ft. long by ½-¾ in. broad, strongly ribbed.
Inflorescence very narrow and loose, ½-1 ft. long. Spikelets brown,
narrow, up to 1½ in. long; glumes hard and pointed, single on distinct
stalks.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Bongo, Dukutu by the Roah River).


=T. flammida= _Benth._

Tall perennial, strongly growing grass, up to over 8 ft. high.
Inflorescence up to over 1 ft. long by 4 in. wide, brush-like, dense.
Spikelets up to ⅓ in. long, narrow, yellow, with a fine awn up to 1 in.
long, single on distinct stalks.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur, Jur Ghattas, Geneina and Kutshuk Ali);
Mongalla Prov. (Kagulu swamp).


=T. annua= _Stapf._

Annual grass up to 2 ft. high. Leaves narrow, 2½-4 in. long.
Inflorescence a loose, erect, panicle. Spikelets nearly ¾ in. long
occurring singly on long stalks, yellow. Glumes covered with black
glands, from which spring fine, silky, white hairs, awns 1-1¾ in. long,
fine.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


889 =Tristachya barbata= _Nees._ MASHAB—Hadendowa.

Perennial grass 6-18 in., woody and tufted at the root. Leaves greyish-
green. Inflorescence somewhat resembling the oat. Spikelets in clusters
of 3, up to ½ in. long; glumes narrow and pointed, sometimes purple at
the base. Awn about 1 in., with a blackened swollen joint below the
centre.

Red Sea Prov. (Jebel Soturba, Lat. 22° N.); Between Suakin and Berber
(Wadi Laemab and Wadi Derumkad).


890 =Avena sp.=

A species of oats.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit).


891 =Danthonia Forskalei= _Trin._

Woody, grey-green, desert grass up to 1 ft. high. Leaves up to 2 in.
long. Inflorescence up to 6 in. long (generally less), moderately dense,
narrow. Spikelets under ½ in. long, narrow, pointed, chaffy.

Kordofan Prov.


=D. sp. nov.=

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra; Abwo waterfall 8,200 ft.).


892 =Phragmites communis= _Trin._ BUS, BUZZ’AM (N. Kordn)—Arab; RUR,
ARUR (Bahr el Jebel)—Dinka; KURR and KWIR—Nuer; NGANZIDUPER and
POPUKI—Zande.

Tall perennial grass, erect, 4-12 ft. high or taller, many jointed.
Inflorescence large, tassel-like, brownish, branches of panicle very
membranous, fine. Spikelets ½-¾ in. long, with fine white silky hairs,
glumes narrow, pointed.

One of the commonest species of the “Sudd” region. The stems are used
for building huts, and also for making arrow shafts and pipe stems by
the Shilluks.

Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov (North); White Nile Prov.; Bahr el Ghazal
Prov.; Bahr el Jebel.


893 =Heleochloa schoenoides= _Host._ GOGHEIB or GUGHEIB (Kordn)—Arab.

Small prostrate annual grass with wiry jointed stems. Leaves few, 1-2
in. long, narrow, pointed. Inflorescences small, compact, grouped at the
end of the stems, surrounded by the cup-like leaf sheaths.

Nubia (Banks of the Nile); Berber Prov. (Kalli near Shendi); Blue Nile
Prov. (Sennar); Kordofan Prov. (Debak and Sagia).


894 =Polypogon monspeliensis= _Desf._

Annual grass up to 2 ft. high, generally less. Leaves mostly from the
base forming a dense tuft. Inflorescence a dense, cylindrical, spike-
like panicle composed of short branches crowded on the main axis.
Spikelets crowded on branches with a fine bristle-like awn.

Dongola Prov. (Banks of the Nile).


895 =Aristida Cummingiana= _Nees._

Small annual grass up to 1 ft. high, stems thin and wiry. Leaves scaly,
almost thread-like. Panicle loose, spikelets single on long, very fine
branches, yellow or purplish, about 1/12 in. long. Awns 3, divided from
the foot, not jointed to glume, smooth, persistent.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=A. Adscensionis= _Linn._ HEMRA—Arab.

Annual (generally), stems thin, wiry, growing in tussocks, from a few
inches to 2 ft. high. Leaves very narrow, rolled, thread-like. Panicle
narrow, fairly dense, interrupted. Spikelets crowded on short branches.
Awn divided into three from the foot, divisions long, column short,
smooth, persistent, not jointed to glume.

One of the common grasses of the plains, largely collected for stock
food.

Widely distributed over the whole of Northern and Central Sudan,
including Darfur.


=A. steudeliana= _Trin._ and _Rupr._ DANABAYA, DEIL EL FAR—Arab;
SIMILUL—Rashida; HUNSIG—Hadendowa.

Annual grass about 1 ft. high, fairly leafy. Leaves ⅛ in. broad, flat,
greyish. Inflorescence up to 4 in. long, very dense like a fox tail.
Awns not jointed to glume, long (2 in.) and fine. Widely distributed in
Northern and Central regions, and also in Upper White Nile Prov. and
Bahr el Jebel (Bari country).


=A. mutabilis= _Trin_ and _Rupr._ GAU UMSHARA (N. Kordn.), DUNBALAB (S.
Kordn)—Arab; TUMFAR—Hadendowa.

Annual grass like _A. Adscensionis_, but growing more thinly. Panicle
very narrow, loose, branches long and fine. Spikelets shortly stalked,
collected into bunches. Awn not jointed to glume, smooth, persistent,
column long, branches comparatively short.

Nubian Desert; Berber Prov. (Wad Ben Naga); Kordofan Prov.


=A. Sieberiana= _Trin._ SUMEIMA (N. Kordn)—Arab.

Perennial, ½-3 ft. high, wiry. Leaves greyish rolled or twisted, narrow
(1/12 in.). Panicle narrow, rarely open, spikelets comparatively few on
slender short branches. Awns very long and fine, jointed at the junction
with the glume from which they ultimately break off, smooth.

Kordofan Prov. Widely distributed.


=A. stipoides= _Lam._ AGEIG, EGEIG (N. Kordn), UM SUBEIBA (Fung) Arab.

Perennial, tufted grass, over 4 ft. high, stems stout. Leaf sheaths
often with a flake of woolly hairs at the base. Leaves up to 2 ft. long.
Panicle large (1 ft.), very open, nodding, with long fine branches
bearing solitary spikelets. Awns similar to _A. Sieberiana_.

White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Obeid, and between Um
Ruaba and Eilafun).


=A. funiculata= _Trin._ and _Rupr._ GAU, HEMRA, UM ASLEILA, NUSSA and
ABU HAREIB (Kordn)—Arab; EILAB—Rashida; WAEILA—Hadendowa.

Annual, growing in tussocks, stems slender, wiry, 10-18 in. high.
Panicle very narrow, lax, branches short, spikelets few. Awns very long,
jointed at the glume, ultimately breaking at the junction, smooth.

Red Sea Prov. (Port Sudan); Between Suakin and Berber (Wadi Eremit);
Kassala Prov. (Um Adam, Gallabat, Gendua River); Atbara River; Khartoum
Prov.; Kordofan Prov.


=A. ciliata= _Desf._

Perennial grass growing in low compact tufts, from which wiry slender
stems arise 1-2 ft. high. Leaves basal, wire-like, greyish, from 1-4 in.
long. Inflorescence narrow, 4-6 in. long, rarely larger. Spikelets
shortly stalked, up to ½ in. long, narrow, 3-nerved. Awns very long and
slender, one branch conspicuously feathery, breaking from the glume.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba Mts.: Wadi Hebera); between Suakin and Berber
(Wadi Omari).


=A. hirtigluma= _Steud._ AGEIG EL BAGGAR—Arab.

Slender perennial arising from a basal tuft of wiry leaves, 1-2 ft.
high. Inflorescence slender, up to 6 in. long. Spikelets ⅓ in. long on
short fine stalks. Glumes hairy. Awns hairy, column as well as the long
middle branch.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat and Khor Tamanib); Darfur Prov. (Kulme).


=A. papposa= _Trin._ and _Rupr._

Annual, growing in small scanty tufts up to 2 ft. high. Leaves not all
basal, wiry. Inflorescence narrow, lax; spikelets narrow, pointed, ⅓ in.
long. Awn long, with a tuft of fine silky hairs at the junction of the
column and the branches. One branch long and feathery at the tip.

Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Prairies 20-80 miles N.E.
of El Fasher).


=A. plumosa= _Linn._ SIMEIMA (or SUMEIMA), GABBAH (Kordn), BAYAD (N.
Kordn), ANNAS (W. Dongola)—Arab.

Perennial, similar in habit to _A. papposa_, but generally denser in
growth and shorter. Awn with middle branch 2-3 in. long, feathery above,
smooth below.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N.); Between Halfa and Dongola Prov.; Berber
Prov. (Abu Hamed).


=A. acutiflora= _Trin._

Perennial grass up to 2 ft. high with thin, wiry, hairy stems. Leaves
also wiry, drying light brown, often in tufts on the stem. Inflorescence
up to 4 in. long, very narrow, lax, with very narrow, acute pointed
spikelets. Awn feathery.

Between Suakin and Berber; Kordofan Prov. (Hassania).


896 =Tragus racemosus= _All._

Annual grass growing in tufts, from a few inches to 1 ft. high. Stems
many-jointed and bent, leafy. Panicle 1-4 in. long, slender, moderately
dense. Spikelets about ⅛-⅙ in. long, narrow, and pointed, with rows of
strong hooked spines along the five prominent ribs.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N.); Blue Nile Prov. (general); Kordofan Prov.
(Um Marba and Abu Garad).


=T. paucispina= _Hack._ MASABIGH (Khartoum Prov.)—Arab.

Small tufted desert grass up to 8 in. high (generally much less). Stems
leafy. Leaf blades short (about 1 in.). Inflorescence generally not so
dense as _T. racemosus_ and the spines finer and straighter.

Between Suakim and Berber (Wadi Sarrawib and Khor Kokreb); Khartoum
Prov. (Soba).


897 =Latipes senegalensis= _Kunth._

A perennial grass, growing in tufts with thin wiry leafy stems up to 10
in. high. Leaves very narrow, inrolled. Inflorescence 2-6 in. long, very
loose, narrow, with a conspicuously wavy axis. Spikelets dark coloured
on wide spaced, wavy, flattened stalks, two to a stalk. The lowest
partly enclosed in a long leaf sheath. Glumes covered below with thick
fleshy spines drawn to a fine point in upper half with the edges thickly
fringed with fine spines.

Red Sea Prov. (Sinkat and Lat. 21° N.). Kordofan Prov. (Bareis and
Shitangul).


898 =Perotis latifolia= _Ait._

Annual or subperennial grass, tufted and leafy at the base, stems bent,
from a few inches to 1½ ft. long. Leaves lance-shaped, up to 3 in. by ⅓
in. wavy, with rigid hairs along the edge. Spike slender, 3-8 in. long,
often purplish, rather dense. Spikelets about 1/12 in. long with a long
soft awn which gives the resemblance of a dog’s tail to the
inflorescence.

Bahr el Ghazal (Mittu land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


899 =Sporobolus= near =S. minutiflorus= _Link._ TENTIT (Meshra el
Zeraf)—Arab.

Annual grass 1½-3 ft. high, with tufted slender stems. Leaves 6-9 in.
long, narrow and fine pointed. Panicle large (12-18 in.), open, branches
very fine and numerous. Spikelets on the end of very fine branchlets,
dark, about 1/30 in. long.

White Nile Prov.; Upper Nile Prov. (Meshra el Zeraf); Mongalla Prov.
(Bor.).


=S. festivus= _Hochst._ DEFERA-MELAIHA—Arab.

Perennial, compactly tufted grass ½-1 ft. long; leaves mostly basal,
thin and wiry, the sheaths persisting and forming dense tufts at the
base. Panicles 2-6 in. broad, oval in outline, very loose and spreading,
erect. Spikelets small, 1/25 in. long, solitary on very slender
pedicels.

Northern Sudan; Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s
Post); Kordofan (Khor Abu Habl); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land).

=var. fibrosus= _Stapf._

Similar in habit to above but with fibrous tufts of leaf sheaths at the
base. The stems are somewhat longer, also the panicle larger but the
spikelets are smaller.

Darfur Prov. (Kulme).

=var. stuppeus= _Stapf._

Resembling type, but with the basal inner fibrous leaf sheaths covered
with pallid, tow-like hairs. The panicle is less spreading, and the
spikelets larger (1/16 in.) than _S. festivus_.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Jur: Kutshuk Ali).


=S. spicatus= _Kunth._

Perennial grass with rigid, jointed stems, ½-1½ ft. high, growing in
small tufts on long runners. Leaves mostly basal, rigid, wiry, awl-like.
Panicle very narrow, cylindric, 2-3 in. long. Spikelets not stalked,
glossy.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar, Dongonab, Soturba at Merza Gubetur. Lat. 21° N.);
Bahr el Jebel (Hillet el Nuer).


=S. pyramidalis= _P. Beauv._

Large grass, often robust, 3-6 ft. high. Leaves long, narrow, strongly
ribbed. Panicle ½-1¼ ft. long by 1-2 in. wide, branches fine, ⅓ in.
long, not spreading much. Spikelets small (about 1/20 in), very short
stalked, crowded on the branches.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Banks of
the Nile; Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas, Bongo, Gurfala; Niamniam
land); Bahr el Jebel (Hillet el Nuer and Bari).


=S. scabriflorus= _Stapf._

Annual, 6-18 in. high, frequently having flowering branches springing
from a leaf sheath about the middle of the stem. Leaves 1-2 in. long by
⅓ in. broad, lance-shaped, with short coarse bristles along the edges.
Panicle up to 4 in. long by 1½ in. wide, lax, open, branches in whorls.
Spikelets 1/20-1/9 in. long, slightly hairy, stamens 2, seeds black.

Bahr el Ghazal (Jur Ghattas).


=S. humifusus= _Kunth._ =var. cordofanus= _Stapf._

Annual, tufted, grass up to 1 ft. high, with many fine, jointed, bent
stems rising from a common base. Leaves lance-shaped, about 1 in. long,
bordered with fine white bristles. Panicle 1½ in. by 1 in., fairly
compact. Branches fine, about 1 in. long, spreading. Spikelets up to
1/12 in. long, stamens 3.

Khartoum Prov.; White Nile Prov. (Geteina); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad).


=S. Schweinfurthii= _Stapf._

Tall perennial grass. Stems erect, stout. Leaves long, narrow, with fine
white hairs. Panicle 1 ft. by 1½-2½ in., branches fine, up to 2 in.
long, not spreading much. Spikelets on short stalks, grain blackish.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land, Ibba River near Nganye).


=S. robustus= _Kunth._

Tall, perennial, strong growing grass, stems 3-8 ft. long, from an often
prostrate and rooting base. Leaves long and narrow, ½-1 ft. by ⅛-¼ in.,
with weak white hairs. Panicle long and narrow with branches interrupted
from the base. Spikelets up to 1/10 in. long.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N., Khor Tamaneb, Tokar); Between Suakin and
Berber (Khor Haraza); Darfur Prov.


=S. glaucifolius= _Hochst._ AKRASH (Meshra el Zeraf) & LUH or LUKH
(Kordn)—Arab; ERKA—Rashida; EINWI—Hadendowa.

Perennial, densely tufted grass, grey green in colour and covered with a
waxy bloom. Stems 12-18 in. long, many jointed, woody and bent below.
Leaves mostly short and narrow. Panicle narrow, interrupted, 3-5 in.
long, very pale. Spikelets very shortly stalked, up to 1/14 in. long.

A good fodder grass.

Northern Sudan and Red Sea District; Blue Nile Prov.; Kordofan Prov.
(Katul Gombara, Safra, Khor Abu Habl); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra el
Zeraf).


900 =Desmostachya cynosuroides= _Stapf._ HALFA—Arab.

Tall, coarse, perennial grass growing in clumps up to 3½ ft. high,
branched from the base, branches covered with leathery sheaths. Leaves
very long, rigid, tips fine pointed. Panicle 6-18 in. by about 1 in.
erect, spikelets crowded on short branches.

The leaves are used for making coarse ropes.

Widely distributed in Northern Sudan along river banks and in Khors;
Kassala Prov.


901 =Eragrostis pilosa= _P. Beauv._ NUA—Dinka; AROA—Shilluk.

Annual grass growing in tufts, very variable in height (3 in. to 3 ft.),
stems slender, shiny. Leaves few, short and narrow. Panicle very
variable in size, very delicate, flexuous, loose. Branches long and
fine, spikelets on fine branchlets, 5-11 flowered, up to 1/5 in. long,
very narrow.

Widely distributed throughout the Sudan.


=E. cf. E. pilosa= _Beauv._

Similar to _E. pilosa_, but larger generally and more leafy. (Panicle up
to 1 ft.).

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar, south of delta).


=E. cf. E. ægyptiaca= _Del._

Annual growing in low tufts. Sudan specimen much reduced; structurally
similar to _E. pilosa_ but spikelets not stalked. 15-20 flowered.

White Nile Prov. (Geteina).


=E. tenuifolia= _Hochst._

Perennial grass with slender stems 1½-3 ft. high, leaves very narrow,
needle-like, often long. Panicle 3-6 in., very open. Spikelets on long,
fine stalks, ⅓ in. by ⅙ in., glumes long pointed, giving a saw-edge
effect.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River, in cultivation).


=E. chalcantha= _Trin._

Perennial, densely tufted grass, stems slender, ½-1 ft. long, 1-jointed,
upper joint ¾ length of stem. Leaves mostly basal, narrow, fine
tapering, 1-4 in. long by 1/12-⅛ in., crowned with soft white glandular
hairs. Panicle narrow, branches short, spikelets olive grey, up to ⅓ in.
long, narrowly oval.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=E. major= _Host._ BANU (Khartoum)—Arab.

Annual grass, growing in small tufts, stems slender, but strong, ½-2 ft.
high. Leaves few, 2-6 in. long, tapering to fine point, glandular along
the edges. Panicle 2-6 in. long, moderately dense, erect. Branches
spreading, stiff, longer at base. Spikelets large, up to ⅓ in. by ⅛ in.,
many flowered. Grain round.

Northern and Central Sudan; Kordofan and Bahr el Ghazal (Jur Ghattas and
Niamniam land).


=E. Barrelierii= _Desv._

Annual grass growing in tufts up to about 1 ft. high. Stems slender,
many jointed. Leaves not glandular. Inflorescence rigid, 1½-3 in. long,
1-1½ in. broad. Branches many, subopposite. Spikelets short stalked,
many flowered, up to ½ in. long by 1/16 in. broad.

Halfa Prov. (Halfa).


=E. tremula= _Hochst._ BINNU or BANU (Kordn)—Arab.

Tufted annual, 6 in. to 2½ ft., stems 3-4-jointed. Leaves narrow, mostly
basal, sometimes glandular. Panicle very large, broad, very loose,
branches solitary. Spikelets nodding, on long, very fine stalks, many-
flowered, up to 1 in. long by 1/12 in. broad.

Blue Nile Prov. (Rufaa); Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Kordofan Prov. (Abu
Garad, Hilla el Jebel, El Obeid, Khor Abu Habl); Bahr el Ghazal Prov.
(Niamniam land).


=E. superba= _Peyr._

Perennial, densely tufted grass with offshoots along the stems, 2-3 ft.
high. Panicle erect, 4-10 in. long, often interrupted below. Spikelets
almost round or oval, large, ¼-¾ in. by 1/5-1/3 in., straw coloured or
purplish, irregularly placed on very unequal stalks.

Mongalla Prov. (Rejaf, near mountain).


=E. obtusa= _Munro._

Densely tufted perennial with numerous leafy shoots along stem, stems
wiry, ½-1½ ft. long. Leaves very narrow, tapering to a very fine point.
Panicle 2-4 in. long, rather lax. Spikelets large, 1/8-1/5 in., roundish
or oval on very fine stalks, nodding in wind.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=E. rubiginosa= _Trin._

Tufted annual, with solitary stems arising from a basal tuft of leaves,
up to about 1 ft. high. Leaves about 3 in. long by ¼ in., lance-shaped,
tinged with red. Inflorescence small, consisting of 5 or 6 short
branches, bearing broad heart-shaped spikelets, which are tinged with
red.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=E. near E. Tholloni= _Franch._

Grass with dense basal tuft of leaves and fibrous sheaths. Leaves long,
narrow, tapering. Flowering stem solitary, up to 2 ft. high.
Inflorescence fairly loose, oval, with fine wavy branches about 1 in.
long, bearing large, broad, heart-shaped spikelets of yellow colour.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


=E. ciliaris= _Link._

Tufted annual 2 in.-1 ft. high, or more; stems slender, hairless or
nearly so, bent at the base, 3-4-jointed, leaves narrow, finely pointed,
short. Spikes dense, 2-6 in. long, narrow, cylindrical. Spikelets
densely crowded, pale, sometimes purplish, 1/10 in. long, 6-12 flowered,
glumes hairy.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, at Mersa Elei, and Lat. 21° N., Khor Tamanib,
Tokar); Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (El Obeid); Bahr el Ghazal Prov.
(Jur Ghattas, and Niamniam land); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River).


=E. interrupta= _P. Beauv._ HOLAGOYA & HEILAGŪT (N. Kordn)—Arab.

Annual, very variable in size, 2 in.-3 ft. high, stem bent at base.
Panicle with erect stiff branches, more or less contracted or slightly
spreading. Spikelets very small, green or pale brown, 1/12-¼ in. long,
glumes not hairy.

Atbara River; Berber Prov. (El Mesherif and Gubba); Khartoum Prov.; Blue
Nile Prov.; Fung Prov.; Kordofan Prov.


=E. namaquensis= _Nees._

Tufted annual, 6 in.-2 ft. high, stem erect, slender. Leaves narrow.
Panicle long and narrow, contracted or loose; spikelets usually crowded,
1/12 in. long, 5-6 flowered, light purplish or brownish.

White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol); Kordofan Prov.; Bahr el Ghazal Prov.
(Jur Ghattas).


=E. aspera= _Nees._ HEMEIRA (Khartoum)—Arab.

Tufted annual 2-4 in. high. Panicle large, open, 10-20 in. long by 4-6
in. broad. Spikelets narrow, blunt, 1/5 in. long, 4-16 flowered, pale or
tinged with purple, glumes rough.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar and Lat. 21° N.); Blue Nile Prov. (Kamlin);
Khartoum Prov.; Fung Prov. (Roseires); Darfur Prov. (Kulme); Bahr el
Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land).


902 =Diplachne fusca= _Beauv._

Coarse perennial growing in compact tufts, stems stout, 3-5 ft. long,
3-jointed, branched, with leafy shoots springing from the lower. Leaf
blades more or less rigid, 3-6 in. by 1/12-⅛ in. Panicle 9-18 in. long,
narrow, slightly nodding, consisting of numerous slender branches up to
5 in. long, not spreading. Spikelets ¼-½ in. long, 5-10 flowered, very
shortly stalked, olive grey in colour.

White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol).


903 =Leptochloa chinensis= _Nees._

A rather coarse annual, stems stout, erect, 2-4 ft. high, many jointed.
Leaves long, 6-18 in., narrow, grey-green. Panicle 6-18 in., consisting
of numerous slender, flexuous branches, often spreading. Spikelets
crowded on the branches, not stalked, dark colour, about 1/10 in. long.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Wau).


=L. sp.=

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


904 =Schoenefeldia gracilis= _Kunth._ DANAB EL NAGA, EMFERID (Blue
Nile), GAU DUMBELAD (N. Kordn)—Arab.

Annual with slender wiry stems growing in tufts, up to 18 in. high.
Leaves very narrow, inrolled at the edges. Spikes 2 or 3, digitate, each
2-4 in. long, axis densely covered with 2 ranks of small spikelets (1/12
in. long), bearing long, flexuous awns up to 1½ in. long.

Northern and Central Sudan; Kordofan Prov.; Darfur Prov. (Jebel Barkin,
Suruj district).


905 =Microchloa setacea= _R. Br._

Perennial, growing in compact tufts, stems very slender, from 2 in. to
more than 1 ft. long. Leaves crowded at the base, short, rigid and wiry,
the basal sheaths breaking into fibres. Spikes solitary, 1-6 in. long,
very slender, little thicker than the stems, usually curved, often
purplish. Spikelets 1-flowered in a single row, up to ⅛ in. long, widely
spaced on the axis of the spike.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


906 =Cynodon Dactylon= _Pers._ NAGIL, DIFRAT EL KHAIL (N. Kordn)—Arab;
BURTIT (Dilling)—Nuba.

Perennial, creeping grass, forming matted tufts, with short, ascending,
slender, many jointed branches from a few inches to 1 ft. long.
Spikelets minute, 1-2-ranked on 3-6 digitate spikes. A common grass, an
excellent fodder, very suited to the making of lawns.

Throughout the Sudan.


907 =Enteropogon macrostachya= _Munro._

Rather coarse perennial grass up to 2½ ft. high, stems slender and wiry,
branched at the base. Leaves long, up to 1/5 in. broad, grey-green.
Spikes up to 6 in. long, solitary, pallid. Spikelets densely packed on
one side of the axis, narrow, and with a short awn.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Barkin).


908 =Chloris pycnothrix= _Trin._

Slender perennial or annual grass, ½-1 ft. high, stems at the base
prostrate, with tufts of barren shoots and stems springing from the
rooting joints. Leaves 1½-2 in., very narrow. Spikes 3 to 9, sessile, or
some shortly stalked, 1½-3 in. long, digitate. Spikelets minute, awn of
lower valve very fine, ½-¾ in. long, upper valve also curved, with fine
bristle ⅙-¼ in. long.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei district).


=C. punctulata= _Hochst._

Perennial, ½-1 ft. high, stems with stout, wiry, creeping stems rooting
at the joints and sending up fresh tufts therefrom. Stems slender,
enclosed in the sheathing bases of the leaves up to the base of the
inflorescence. Spikes 1-2½ in. long, 3-6, digitate. Spikelets minute,
rigid, and bristle-like, about ½ in. long, yellow.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21-22° N.); Khartoum Prov.; Kordofan Prov. (Joka).


=C. virgata= _Swartz._ TIMALA—Hadendowa.

Perennial or annual, 1-3 ft. high. Stems often prostrate below, and
giving off barren shoots from the rooting joints. Spikes 6-15 or more,
digitate, whitish green or purplish, 1-2½ in. long. Spikelets about ⅙
in. long, 2-awned, on upper valve ¼-½ in. long, on lower ½-¾ in. long,
lower valve also hairy and bearded below the tip.

A fodder grass.

Widely distributed in Northern and Central Sudan (Fung Prov. (Shellal).

=var. elegans= _Stapf._

Similar to type, but spikes up to 3 in. long, lower valve of spikelets
conspicuously swollen.

Red Sea Prov. (Erkowit & Tokar).


=C. gayana= _Kunth._

Perennial or annual, 2-4 ft. high. Stems often stout with runners at the
base from which spring barren shoots. Leaves narrow, long tapering, ½ to
more than 1 ft. long. Spikes 6-15, digitate, not stalked, rarely
spreading, 2½-4 in. long. Spikelets ⅛ in. long, shortly 2-awned, dense
on the spikes.

Mongalla Prov. (Yei Valley District).


=C. barbata= _Sw._

Perennial very variable in size and habit. Stems stout, 1-3 ft. high,
with long creeping runners at the base. Spikes 4-20, ½-4 in. long,
digitate. Spikelets 1/10-⅙ in., green or red-purple, 3-awned, awn ¼-⅓
in. long; glumes very hairy, and pointed at the tip.

Darfur Prov.


=C. breviseta= _Benth._ DAZ (Meshra el Zeraf) UM ASABA—Arab; YOLOVAN
(Meshra el Zeraf)—Dinka.

Perennial up to 2 ft. high, with stout stems and creeping basal runners.
Leaves long and narrow. Spikes up to 12, about 3 in. long. Spikelets
about ⅙ in. long, 3-awned, but awns only short bristles, glumes slightly
hairy, often fringed with purple.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Kordofan Prov. (Abu Haraz); Darfur
Prov. (Kulme, 3,600 ft.); Upper White Nile Prov. (Meshra el Zeraf); Bahr
el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas); Mongalla Prov. (Yei River, Gondokoro).


=C. villosa= _Pers._

Perennial from a densely tufted stout woody base which is clothed with
broad overlapping leaf-sheaths. Stems slender, up to 3 ft. high, but
generally smaller. Leaves very narrow 1-3 in. Spikes solitary up to 3
in. long. Spikelets 4-awned, awns up to ⅓ in. long, very dense on the
axis, triangular, with the base upwards, glumes very hairy.

A good fodder grass in desert regions.

Red Sea Prov. (Khor Tamanib); Between Suakin and Berber (Wadi Omari).


=C. spathacea= _Hochst._

Tufted perennial up to 1 ft. high, similar in habit to _C. villosa_, but
generally smaller, and the solitary spike wholly or partly enclosed in
spathe-like leaf-sheaths. The awns also are rather more rigid.

Between Suakin and Berber (Wadi Laemab); Atbara River (Jebel Erimbat,
Goz Regeb); Blue Nile Prov. (Wad el Haddad, Wad el Gamali); White Nile
Prov. (Jebel Arashkol); Kordofan Prov. (Bir Sodari and Abu Haraz).


909 =Ctenium elegans= _Kunth._ DANAB EL NAGA, ABU-DHANABI—Arab.

Perennial densely tufted grass, stems thin, wiry, 1½-2½ ft. high. Leaves
scanty, narrow. Spikes solitary up to 1 ft. long. Spikelets very narrow,
densely packed on one side of the axis like the teeth of a comb, shortly
awned with a fine bristle. Glumes and axis finely hairy.

Blue Nile Prov. (Sennar); Kordofan Prov. (Jebel Kon, Khor Abu Habl);
Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Bongo: Gir).


=C. Schweinfurthii= _Gilg._

Similar in general habit to _C. elegans_, but differs in that two of the
glumes are strongly hairy, the inner glume is not glandular and the awn
from the side nerve is conspicuous.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Bongo land).


910 =Coelachyrum brevifolium= _Nees._

Small annual tufted grass 3-6 in. high, frequently bearing long trailing
stems with leafy branches at the joints. Leaves 1-2 in. long, lance-
shaped. Panicle loose, branches up to six in number, about 1 in. long,
irregularly arranged. Spikelets crowded on the branches, about ⅛ in.
long, 3-4-flowered, glumes ovate.

Red Sea Prov. (Tokar and Lat. 21° N.).


911 =Eleusine indica= _Gaertn._

Annual, often strong growing, but variable according to locality, from a
few inches to 2 ft. in height. Stems flattened, 2-3-jointed. Leaves
often numerous, crowded near the base, long, narrow, midrib conspicuous.
Spikes 2-14, 1-7 in. long, digitate, with usually 1 or 2 extra below.
Spikes slender, straight, axis breaking above the glumes. Spikelets
1/8-1/6 in. long, in two rows all crowded on one side of the axis. Seed
heart-shaped in cross section.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Nubia
Mts. Prov. (Talodi); Mongalla Prov. (Gondokoro, Mongalla and Yei River);
Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas and Niamniam land).


=E. coracana= _Gaertn._ TELABUN—Arab; KOELL—Bongo; MONU or MARO—Zande.

Very like _E. indica_, but more robust, up to 5 ft. high. Spikes thick,
often curved, axis tough, grain roundish.

Cultivated for the grain in the Southern Sudan, where it is used both
for food and in the preparation of native beer.

Fung Prov. (Fazoghli); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas and Niamniam
land); Bahr el Jebel (Bari country).


=E. flagellifera= _Nees._ HOMRA (Red Sea Prov.)—Arab; IGLA—Rashida;
TOKSHIN—Hadendowa.

Perennial with long, stiff, wiry, creeping stems, much branched and
rooting at the joints, which are often leafy and thickened. Erect
flowering stems about 10 in. long. Spikes 3-6, 1-1½ in. long. Spikelets
crowded, overlapping, ⅛-⅓ in. long, often purplish.

Desert grass.

Red Sea Prov. (littoral, Lat. 22° N., Wadi el Arab and Tokar); Between
Suakin and Berber (Wadi Laemab); Berber Prov. (Atbara river); Kassala
Prov. (Um Adam).


=E. verticillata= _Roxb._

Tufted annual 1-3 ft. high, with many strong leafy stems. Leaves rather
broad. Spikes numerous, rather scattered on the axis or arranged in
whorls, up to 3 in. long. Spikelets large, up to ¼ in., densely crowded,
glumes very pointed, overlapping.

Between Suakin and Berber (Jebel Okurr).


912 =Dactyloctenium ægypticum= _Willd._ KOREIB (Khartoum), UM ASABA
(Kordn)—Arab.

Annual, 1-1½ ft. high, stems stoutish, sometimes prostrate and rooting
from the joints at the base. Leaves long, tapering to a fine point, 1-5
in. long by 1½-⅙ in. wide. Often hairy with white hairs bearing a small
tubercle at the base. Spikes 2-6, digitate, ½-2 in. long, axis stout
with spikelets densely packed in 2 rows facing in one direction and
spreading at right angles. Spikelets up to ⅛ in. long, stiff, armed with
a short curved rigid awn.

A good fodder plant; the seed is eaten at times.

Widely distributed in the Sudan.


=D. glauciphyllum= _Courb._

Perennial with long creeping stems bearing leafy flowering tufts at the
thickened joints, 8 in.-1 ft. high. Leaves mainly basal, 1-5 in. long,
very narrow, thinly covered with long soft white hairs. Spikes about 4
in number, digitate, up to 1 in. long, branches densely packed with
spikelets about 1/5 in. long, glumes prolonged into a sharp hard point.

A desert grass, eaten readily by cattle, sheep, and goats, but dangerous
to horses causing irritation to the bladder and kidneys if eaten in
large quantities.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N., Tokar, Khor Tamanib); Between Suakin and
Berber (Wadi Sarrawib and Wadi el Omari).


913 =Dinebra arabica= _Stapf._ EL MILEIHA (Khartoum) and MAMLEIHA
(Fung)—Arab.

Annual leafy grass 1-3 ft. high, growing in dense tufts, stems stout,
branching from the base. Leaves flat, 3-8 in. long. Inflorescence up to
1 ft. long, axis stout, rigid, erect. Branches rather irregularly and
widely spaced, becoming closer towards the apex, ½-2½ in. long.
Spikelets overlapping, ⅙ in. long, outer glumes drawn out into a long,
fine, rigid point.

Widely distributed in the Sudan.


914 =Trichoneura arenaria= _Ekman._

Small tufted annual grass, woody at the base up to 4 in. long, finely
dense. Spikelets flattened, shortly awned.

Red Sea Prov. (Soturba, Mersa Elei).


915 =Triraphis nana= _Boiss._

Dwarf desert grass, annual, about 4 in. high. Leaves very narrow and
fine pointed. Panicle brush-like, oval, about 1 in. long. Spikelets
dense, very hairy, with a fine bristle-like awn.

Red Sea Prov. (Lat. 21° N.).


916 =Tripogon sp.= (See Key).

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, high zone).


917 =Enneapogon elegans= _Stapf._ MASABIGH—Arab.

Perennial grass about 15 in. high, with tufted woody base. Leaves mostly
basal, with tight woody sheaths, blades very narrow, finely hairy.
Inflorescence spike-like, whitish or purplish, up to 4 in. long.
Spikelets in clusters, fairly dense on the axis. Glumes narrow, divided
apically into 9 feathery awns. Grain oval, with long silky white hairs
springing from the upper half.

A good fodder grass.

Between Suakin and Berber (Wadi Eremit); Khartoum Prov. (Jebel
Malakhit).


=E. mollis= _Lehm._

Perennial, more or less finely hairy all over. Stems 1-3 ft. long.
Leaves long, up to ⅜ in. broad, mostly narrower. Inflorescence spike-
like, often interrupted and lobed below, ⅙ in. long. Spikelets crowded,
up to 1/5 in. long, awns 9, feathery, up to ¼ in. long, glumes often
tinged with black, the whole rather like a fox tail.

Blue Nile Prov. (Near mouth of Dinder River). Kordofan Prov.; Darfur
Prov.


918 =Schmidtia pappophoroides= _Steud._ EL MILEIHA (N. Kordn)—Arab.

Coarse tufted perennial grass up to 1½ ft. high, covered with fine short
hairs. Stems bent and woody below. Panicle up to 4 in. long, spike-like,
narrow, fairly dense. Spikelets in clusters of 4-6, hairy. Glumes
9-nerved, five being prolonged into straight fine bristle-like awns, of
a brownish yellow colour.

A good fodder grass.

Kordofan Prov. (Wadi Gotta and Kheiran); Darfur Prov. (Jebel Sungur,
Suruj district).


919 =Oryza brachyantha= _Stapf._ RUZ EL WADI—Arab.

Tall leafy grass with stout stems growing in inundated or swampy soil,
about 2 ft. high or more. Leaves long, tapering to a fine point.
Spikelets large, flat, oblong, about ⅜ in. long, shortly stalked on the
wavy branches of an elongated narrow panicle, including the awn over 1
ft. long. Awns slender, rigid, rough, 6 in. or more long.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=O. Barthii= _Chev._ RUZ—Arab, ALABU—Dinka and Shilluk.

Coarse leafy grass with stout ribbed stems growing in inundated khors
near river; about 2 ft. high. Leaves up to ½ in. wide. Panicle rather
lax, up to 1 ft. long. Spikelets reddish-yellow, with short stiff white
hairs, ⅓ in. long, narrow, and tapering to a fine tip. Awns wavy, less
than 3 in. long.

Upper White Nile Prov. (Kio plantation).


=O. punctata= _Kotschy._ RUZ EL WADI, UM SHEBITI or TIBN—Arab.

Aquatic grass growing in flooded khors, 2-3 ft. high, stems moderately
stout. Leaves under ½ in. wide, finely ribbed. Panicle very lax, up to
10 in. long, branches few. Spikelets oblong, ¼ in. long, hairy on the
ribs. Awn slightly curved, about 1½ in. long.

White Nile Prov. (Jebel Arashkol); Kordofan (Khor Abu Habl.); Fung Prov.
(Jongol’s Post).


=O. officinalis= _Wall._

Tall leafy grass up to 6 ft. high, stems slender. Leaves 1-2 ft. by ½-1½
in., pale grey green. Panicle up to 8 in. long, very lax, branches
spreading. Spikelets ⅙ in., white. Awn up to ½ in. long.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land,
Nabambisso River).


920 =Leersia hexandra= _Sw._

Rice-like grass growing in swampy soil, smaller and more slender than
true Rice, 2-4 ft. high. Inflorescence a loose panicle 2-4 in. long.
Spikelets ⅙ in. long, lower florets absent, glumes not awned. Leaves
8-12 in. long by ⅓-½ in. broad, flat, sharp edged.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land, Nabambisso River); Mongalla Prov.
(Yei River).


=L. angustifolia= _Munro._

Tufted grass up to 2 ft. high, growing in swamps. Inflorescence loose,
purplish, bristles on edges of glumes nearly straight and set at an
acute angle. Leaves very narrow, awl-like, folded.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur Ghattas).


=L. drepanothria= _Stapf._

Similar to above in habit. Bristles on glumes curled.

Fung Prov. (Jongol’s Post).


921 =Elytrophorus articulatus= _P. Beauv._

An erect annual grass 6-18 in. high. Leaves as long as the stem and
spikes very narrow. Inflorescence often larger than the stem, reddish
yellow in colour. Spikelets in globose clusters that are densely packed
along a central axis, forming a long cylindric or interrupted spike.
Spikelets ⅙ in. long, with awned glumes surrounded by many empty glumes.
Awns about ¼ in. long.

Kordofan Prov. (Abu Garad, El Mareikib); Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Jur
Ghattas).


922 =Aeluropus repens= _Parl._

A rigid grass with long wiry roots. Stems 6-12 in. long, densely tufted,
branched, hard, erect or prostrate, with long, often creeping runners.
Leaves ⅙-1 in., mostly spreading at right angles to the stem, inrolled
and sharp pointed resembling thorns in appearance. Inflorescence ¼-⅔ in.
in diameter, globose or ovoid. Spikelets densely compacted.

Red Sea (Coastal region).


923 =Bromus adoensis= _Hochst._

Annual about 1 ft. high, stems slender, leaves long, narrow. Panicle
lax, spikelets 6-9 flowered on slender flexuous stalks, tassel-like,
purplish. Awns up to ¾ in. long.

Darfur Prov. (Jebel Marra, Niurnya 6,500 ft.). Red Sea Prov. (between
3-4,000 ft.).


924 =Olyra latifolia= _Linn._

Tall branched perennial 10-15 ft. high, growing in shady moist khors.
Leaves large, 4-7 in. long, by 1-2¾ in. broad, flat, narrowed to a fine
tip. Inflorescence 3-6 in. long, somewhat loose. Spikelets oval, about ¼
in. long, awn up to nearly an inch, flexuous. Glumes papery.

Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Niamniam land, Boddo River). Mongalla Prov. (Yei
River).


925 =Oxytenanthera abyssinica= _Munro._ GANNA—Arab; MEDERA—Hameg; TAL
(J. Daier), LUI (J. Eliri)—Nuba; LAU—Nuer; NGANZI—Zande.

Tall leafy shrub with woody stems (canes) rising from a thick rhizome.
Leaves lance-head shaped, up to 6 in. by 1 in. wide. Spikelets in dense
terminal heads in more or less globose whorls.

The Bamboo; the stems are used for building and many other purposes.

Kassala Prov. (Gallabat, Matamma); Fung Prov. (J. Fazoghli); Nuba Mts.
Prov. (Khors); Atbara River; Bahr el Ghazal Prov. (Khors).




                         INDEX TO NATIVE NAMES.


                             =ARABIC NAMES=


                                                             SERIAL NO.

  Abbaka                                                            480

  Abdugulgul                                                        698

  Abhamāda                                                          370

  Abjalajel                                                          22

  Abkileh                                                           291

  Abl                                                               155

  Abongandur                                                        693

  Abrukab                                                           111

  Abu Ain Safra                                                     543

  Abu Beka                                                          480

  Abu Dhanabi                                                       909

  Abu ’Eleiba                                                       618

  Abu Fas                                                           689

  Abu Galagel                                                        22

  Abu Garada                                                        855

  Abu Gawi                                                     334, 480

  Abu Halagin                                                       618

  Abu Hamāda                                                        370

  Abu Hareib                                                        895

  Abu Hosaba                                                        628

  Abu Khalafof                                                      199

  Abu Khameira                                                 270, 368

  Abu Khamir                                                        430

  Abu Lebben                                    142, 229, 440, 451, 460

  Abu Leila                                                         276

  Abu Likeita                                                        30

  Abu Liseig                                                        256

  Abu Marfein                                                       478

  Abu Nuwara                                                        674

  Abu Rikhis                                                        864

  Abu Rukba                                                         880

  Abu Shoka                                                         119

  Abu Shutur                                                        662

  Abu Shweika                                                  119, 570

  Abu Sidra                                                         662

  Abu Surug                                                         282

  Abu Tamara                                                         38

  Abu Tifa                                                          722

  Abu Tumra                                                         113

  Addar Abu Shar                                                    855

  Addar                                                             855

  Addimir                                                            37

  Adlib                                                             102

  ’Ads Sudani                                                       339

  ’Ads Surgam                                                       323

  Af                                                                814

  Agash                                                             461

  Agassir                                                           244

  Ageig                                                             895

  Ageig El Baggar                                                   895

  Agur                                                              164

  Ain El Jenel                                                      593

  Ajur                                                              164

  Ajur El Ghazal                                                    164

  Ajur El Kelb                                                      164

  Akasa                                                             244

  Akeish                                                            461

  Aklimawi                                                          855

  ’Akrash                                                           899

  Alag                                                               38

  Alankuwe                                                          368

  Algulu-ar                                                         430

  Alloseg                                                           200

  Alluseig                                                          200

  Amayok                                                            303

  Ambaj                                                             311

  Ambatch                                                           311

  Amboru                                                            218

  Amgineidilad                                                      344

  Amzaq                                                             402

  Anaba                                                             370

  Anawidik                                                          111

  Ankolib                                                           855

  Annas                                                             895

  Ansora                                                            866

  Ara                                                               107

  Araa Aassali                                                      174

  Araa Kossa                                                        164

  Araa Stambuli                                                     174

  Araka                                                             367

  Ararib                                                             86

  Ardeib                                                            275

  Argun                                                             814

  Arish                                                             402

  Arkala                                                  133, 440, 618

  Arrada                                                            288

  Arrawal                                                           543

  Arsh                                                              161

  Asad el Tugule                                                    413

  Asat el Gird                                                      413

  Asfar                                                        105, 571

  Asin                                                               30

  Aslanga                                                           765

  Ass’aib                                                            38

  Attar                                                             244

  Aud                                                               287

  Azanaya                                                           599

  Babanus                                                           342

  Babirusa                                                          827

  Baggis                                                            480

  Bahana                                                            855

  Bal                                                               340

  Balah                                                             814

  Bambit                                                            104

  Bamia                                                             224

  Banaduro                                                          611

  Bango                                                             361

  Banu                                                              901

  Basham                                                            199

  Bassal El Kelb                                                    772

  Bassal El Wadi                                                    757

  Battikh                                                           172

  Bayad (See also Be-eid.)                                     781, 895

  Bebit                                                             105

  Bedingan                                                          608

  Bedingan El Guta                                                  608

  Be-Eid (See also Bayad.)                                          781

  Begheil                                                      676, 841

  Bekheiset                                                         756

  Berīd                                                        764, 772

  Bersīm baladi                                                     296

  Bersīm hegazi                                                     295

  Bet el Arus                                                       329

  Beylasān                                                          163

  Bigm                                                              155

  Biltik                                                            550

  Binnu                                                             901

  Bombay                                                            618

  Bortugan                                                          379

  Buda                                                              652

  Burdi                                                        738, 827

  Burnus                                                            866

  Burri                                                             855

  Bus                                                               892

  Buzz’am                                                           892

  Dabalab                                                           239

  Dabkar                                                        33, 392

  Dafara                                                            602

  Dahaian                                                            44

  Dahassir                                                          300

  Dakar                                                             814

  Dakheyan                                                           44

  Dalle                                                              86

  Danaban                                                           692

  Danabaya                                                          895

  Danab El Abilani                                                  111

  Danab El Kelb                                           104, 882, 886

  Danab El Naga                                                904, 909

  Danab El Tut                                                       88

  Darot                                                             188

  Dawa na Samaki                                                    303

  Dayok                                                             756

  Daz                                                               908

  Deberrah                                                          101

  Defera                                                       873, 877

  Defera Melaiha                                                    899

  Deil El Far                                                       895

  Deilu                                                              86

  Deleib                                                            818

  Demchirai                                                    256, 257

  Denaba                                                             57

  Dereisa (See also Dreisa.)                                        117

  Derma                                                             300

  Difera                                                            877

  Difrat El Khei                                                    906

  Dinsis                                                            528

  Dis                                                          738, 827

  Dom                                                          819, 820

  Dreisa                                                            117

  Dreys (See also Dreisa.)                                          117

  Dubagha                                                           204

  Dueid                                                             781

  Duffeig                                                           814

  Dukhan                                                            616

  Dukhān El Azabat                                                  602

  Dukhn                                                             886

  Dunbalab                                                          895

  Dura Seifi                                                        855

  Dura Shami                                                        840

  Duruba                                                            394

  Durūt                                                             188

  Egeig                                                             895

  Eibnusa                                                           342

  Eish Er Rif                                                       840

  El Ara                                                            107

  El Aud                                                            287

  El Bueida                                                         104

  El Erra                                                           163

  El Gurun                                                          121

  El Hād                                                            628

  El Kurda                                                          873

  El Luinda                                                         886

  El Mileiha                                                   913, 918

  El Rak                                                            367

  El Sha’aluk                                                       163

  El Sherei’a                                                       300

  El Torak                                                          855

  El Tübbür                                                         739

  El Turba                                                          340

  El Ut                                                             287

  El Wein                                                           652

  El Yeir                                                           163

  Emferid                                                           904

  Enab El Dib                                                       608

  Ergana                                                            238

  Erg El Agrab                                                  22, 326

  Erg El Akrab                                                       22

  Erg El Asda                                                       111

  Erg El Bugr                                                       692

  Erg El Dam                                                        111

  Erg El Haggar                                                      16

  Erg El Mehabba                                                     38

  Erg El M’oterash                                                  619

  Erg El Moya                                                       657

  Erg El Nāl                                                        207

  Erg El Nimr                                                       682

  Erg El Saggat                                                     426

  Erg El Shagat                                                     657

  Erg el Tueirat                                                    142

  Erg El Tundub                                                     657

  Erg Habūb El Kheil                                                460

  Erra                                                              163

  Eshūb                                                             827

  Fagus                                                             164

  Fakhah                                                       111, 685

  Faki Baladawaya                                                   722

  Farah El Gumri                                                    340

  Fareq                                                             155

  Fartaga                                                           291

  Faru                                                              618

  Feraisha                                                          320

  Feterita                                                          855

  Figl                                                               53

  Fiki Mostahi                                                      855

  Fikki                                                              41

  Filfil Ahmar                                                      610

  Fiss El Kelb                                                      106

  Fiss El Kelab                                                      96

  Foqqesh                                                           612

  Forgeyh                                                           533

  Ful                                                               322

  Ful Sudani                                                        315

  Gabbah                                                            895

  Gaddeim                                                           199

  Gaddum El Teital                                                  855

  Gafal                                                        385, 386

  Gambil                                                            599

  Gameiz                                                            352

  Gandah                                                            742

  Ganna                                                             925

  Garaa Aasali                                                      174

  Garaa Kossa                                                       164

  Garaa Stambuli                                                    174

  Garad                                                             287

  Garadaya                                                     269, 288

  Garawi                                                            855

  Gargadan (See also Karkadan.)                                     218

  Garguir                                                            47

  Gash El Fil                                                       788

  Gash El Nāl                                                       886

  Gassabi                                                           855

  Gatgat                                                            544

  Gatha                                                             117

  Gau                                                               895

  Gau Dumbelad                                                      904

  Gauumshara                                                        895

  Gereigdan (See also Gregdan.)                                     199

  Gereidah                                                          814

  Gerfet El Dūd                                                     288

  Gesharingeik                                                      332

  Gharaz                                                            841

  Gharba                                                             44

  Ghareir                                                      602, 606

  Ghubeish                                                     107, 224

  Ghubeyra                                                543, 602, 624

  Gibbein                                                           608

  Gid El Gutn                                                       225

  Gilban                                                            324

  Gimbil                                                            599

  Gishta                                                              8

  Gogheib                                                           893

  Gongoleis                                                         212

  Gonoih                                                            229

  Gregdan (See also Gereigdan.)                                     205

  Gubein                                                            608

  Gueir                                                             352

  Gughan                                                       417, 418

  Gugheib                                                           893

  Gula                                                              370

  Gulgul                                                            698

  Gulum                                                              34

  Gumali                                                             19

  Gungara                                                           886

  Gurdi                                                              60

  Gurdum                                                            571

  Guta                                                              608

  Gutn Americani                                                    227

  Gutn Arabi                                                        227

  Gutn El Khala                                                     225

  Gutn Mumtaz                                                       227

  Gutub                                                             225

  Habahan                                                           797

  Habaq                                                             649

  Habashkol                                                         164

  Habat El Ain (See also Hab bita El Ain.)                          269

  Habbas                                                            286

  Habb El Meluk                                                     241

  Hab bita El Ain (See also Hab El Ain.)                            286

  Hab El Ain (See also Hab bita El Ain.)                            269

  Habīl                                                             191

  Habilarus                                                    325, 329

  Habil Er Rus                                                      325

  Halfa                                                        882, 900

  Halleyu                                                           440

  Haluk                                                        657, 658

  Hamaisi                                                           855

  Hamareib                                                          865

  Hamerai                                                           866

  Hanbūk                                                            218

  Handal                                                            172

  Hantud                                                            618

  Har                                                                77

  Hara                                                               77

  Harayrah                                                          105

  Haraz                                                             287

  Hareish                                                            84

  Hargal                                                            447

  Harhar                                                            344

  Harr                                                              562

  Harra                                                              50

  Harrīsh                                                           603

  Harsh                                                             608

  Hashab                                                            287

  Hashish                                                           361

  Hashish El Farras                                                 513

  Hebeibu                                                            61

  Hegarig                                                           855

  Heglig                                                            382

  Hegiri                                                            855

  Heilagūt                                                          901

  Hekkabit                                                           34

  Helba                                                             294

  Helew                                                             877

  Hemeira                                                           901

  Hemra                                                             895

  Henna                                                             131

  Hereishah                                                         269

  Hersha                                                            688

  Heskanit                                                     886, 887

  Hinnat El Abilain                                                 356

  Hog El Fil                                                        426

  Holagoya                                                          901

  Homeid                                                       402, 404

  Homeira                                                           212

  Homra                                                    84, 393, 911

  Homraya                                                           393

  Hummus                                                            321

  Humr                                                              212

  Hunbug                                                             34

  Hurhar                                                            342

  Hurua                                                             255

  Ibnu                                                              258

  Ideinat El Far                                                    303

  Inderab                                                           599

  Inderab Entaya                                                    599

  Inderab Gimbil                                                    599

  Irkis                                                              37

  Jo                                                                224

  Jukhan                                                       417, 418

  Kadada                                                            284

  Kahali                                                            607

  Kakamūt                                                           287

  Kakwa                                                             855

  Kalto                                                             368

  Kamanga                                                           361

  Karauerau                                                     35, 270

  Karb El Wadi                                                      383

  Karkadan (See also Gargadan.)                                      36

  Karkade                                                           224

  Karmudoda                                                         466

  Kasharingi                                                        332

  Kereira                                                           602

  Kereiwit El Ghurab                                                303

  Khantut                                                           618

  Kharaq El Bahr                                                    547

  Kharub                                                            270

  Kharūm                                                            478

  Kharuma                                                           287

  Khashkhash                                                        661

  Khashkhash Abiad                                                  661

  Khashkhash Azrak                                                  344

  Khashkhash el Sughur                                              344

  Khazan                                                            756

  Khelisan                                                          199

  Khiar                                                             164

  Khiruwi                                                           255

  Khubbeiza                                                         214

  Kilga                                                             772

  Kintara                                                           577

  Kirken                                                            224

  Kirkir                                                            478

  Kittir                                                            287

  Kol                                                               306

  Kolokass                                                          744

  Koreib                                                       887, 912

  Koreish Battikh                                                   172

  Kowal                                                              30

  Kowoge                                                             38

  Kudur                                                             156

  Kūk                                                               287

  Kulam                                                             221

  Kulkul                                                            270

  Kunutal                                                           221

  Kurain                                                            698

  Kurdan                                                             36

  Kurkaban                                                          229

  Kurmut                                                             37

  Kurmut Sogheir                                                     37

  Kursan                                                             35

  Kushu-Kushu                                                       722

  Kutkat                                                            543

  Labakh                                                            288

  Lablab Ahmar                                                      105

  Ladua                                                             142

  Laghrab El Homar                                                  855

  Lalōb                                                             382

  Laot                                                              287

  Lara                                                              107

  Lasakwa                                                           243

  Lassaf                                                             34

  Layuk                                                             280

  Lebbek                                                            288

  Lebinga                                                           258

  Leru                                                              107

  Leyun                                                             402

  Libbein                                                           229

  Libbeyn                                                           229

  Libbia                                                            691

  Lif                                                          161, 375

  Limoun Baladi                                                     379

  Limoun Hindi                                                      379

  Limoun Hellu                                                      379

  Lisan El Teir                                                 30, 106

  Luban                                                             386

  Lubbun                                                            593

  Lubia Afin                                                        336

  Lubia El Fil                                                      331

  Lubia Hamra                                                       332

  Lubia Hellu                                                       333

  Lubia Khadra                                                      332

  Lufa                                                         161, 375

  Luh                                                               899

  Lukh                                                              899

  Lulu                                                              419

  Luseig                                                       200, 882

  Lussaq                                                            360

  Lūtabelain                                                        297

  Luweis                                                  340, 460, 691

  Mableben (See also Malbeina.)                                229, 460

  Mahad                                                              48

  Mahagaya                                                          258

  Mahalab                                                           689

  Mahareib                                                          865

  Mahbab                                                            684

  Mai                                                                39

  Makhshash El Rigal                                                218

  Malaita                                                           579

  Malbeina                                                          229

  Malbeina Hamra                                                    229

  Malhi                                                             861

  Malot                                                             579

  Mamleiha                                                          913

  Managiga                                                          225

  Maraira                                                           865

  Marakh                                                            460

  Marhabeib                                                         865

  Mari  (Khasa)                                                      38

  Masabigh                                                     896, 917

  Mashika                                                           669

  Mashtura                                                          662

  Meikah                                                            366

  Merakh                                                            460

  Mesheit                                                           756

  Mideka                                                            368

  Mileiha                                                      913, 918

  Mimligada                                                         224

  Miremit                                                            71

  Mirmid                                                             71

  Mishka                                                            467

  Mistika                                                           467

  Miswak                                                            367

  Mokheit                                                            35

  Molokhia                                                          202

  Morgan                                                            612

  Morreya                                                           695

  Muddeyd                                                  57, 142, 624

  Mudus                                                             279

  Mufrak El Rowair                                                   30

  Mughad                                                            173

  Mughreib                                                          886

  Mulley                                                       101, 628

  Mulukhia                                                          202

  Munderab                                                          599

  Murdu                                                              34

  Murmit                                                            624

  Murraya                                                           393

  Mutrak                                                            199

  Na’anaa                                                  30, 688, 111

  Nabak                                                             372

  Nabak El Fil                                                      372

  Nadawe                                                            628

  Nagīl                                                             906

  Nakhla                                                            814

  Nakhl El Faraun                                                   815

  Nakhshash El Dubban                                               528

  Nāl                                                               865

  Namnam                                                             48

  Nar El Assad                                                      652

  Nar El Fil                                                        657

  Naring                                                            379

  Nawa                                                              814

  Nideiana                                                          631

  Nil Baladi                                                        300

  Nitaya                                                            814

  Nuarah                                                            105

  Nu’em                                                             628

  Nur El Assad                                                      652

  Nussa                                                             895

  Nussaq                                                            360

  Nuttash                                                           291

  Obeish                                                            190

  Orf Ed Dik                                                        106

  Owarida                                                           619

  Qortom                                                            571

  Quta                                                              608

  Ra’afa                                                            340

  Ra’al                                                             717

  Raba’a (See also Rab’ah, Rubaa’ and Rubai.)                    81, 86

  Rab’ah (See also Raba’a.)                                          86

  Rakab                                                             687

  Rashad                                                             50

  Rau Er Au                                                          38

  Reshad El Bahr                                                     51

  Reykha                                                             77

  Rhimta                                                            602

  Rigla                                                         87, 142

  Rihan                                          30, 513, 543, 544, 701

  Rimith                                              71, 524, 532, 543

  Rotab                                                             814

  Rotaro                                                            385

  Rubaa’ (See also Raba’a).                                           84

  Rubai                                                             855

  Rubbul                                                            543

  Rubeish                                                           190

  Rubl                                                              298

  Ruml                                                              298

  Rummān                                                            132

  Rutrut                                                            385

  Ruz                                                               919

  Ruz El Wadi                                                       919

  Saad                                                              827

  Saat                                                              697

  Sabarig                                                           291

  Sabungheyt                                                        593

  Safeira                                                   30, 32, 291

  Safeira El Bahr                                                    68

  Safra                                                             855

  Safra Kohia                                                       855

  Safsaf (See also Sofsaf.)                                         349

  Saggar                                                             42

  Saggat                                                             62

  Saghlift                                                          533

  Sahaba                                                            189

  Sahai                                                              35

  Sakaran                                            612, 614, 615, 663

  Sala’alaa                                                         375

  Salala                                                            375

  Salgam                                                            287

  Sallam                                                            287

  Sam                                                               370

  Samar Baladi                                                      826

  Samr                                                         287, 661

  Sangala                                                           882

  Sanna                                                             269

  Sant                                                              287

  Sardol                                                            352

  Sareh                                                              38

  Sarha                                                              38

  Sayal                                                             287

  Sebakh                                                            628

  Se’ed                                                             827

  Segar                                                             652

  Seid                                                         826, 827

  Seilag                                                            189

  Sena                                                              306

  Senat                                                             164

  Senat Ajur                                                        164

  Senat Tibish                                                      164

  Senna                                                             269

  Senna El Kelb                                                     269

  Senna El Rif                                                      269

  Senna Mekka                                                       269

  Sereira                                                           288

  Sesaban                                                 268, 280, 306

  Sesifan                                                            35

  Seyid                                                             352

  Sha’aluk                                                     163, 169

  Shabat Ahmar                                                      855

  Sha’eret El Bahayam                                                82

  Shagar El Dud                                                      38

  Shagar El Fas                                                     286

  Shagar El Fil (See also Shag El Fil.)                             459

  Shagar El Muz                                                     801

  Shagar El Sim                                                229, 438

  Shagar El Tin                                                     352

  Shagar El Zeraf                                                    38

  Shag El Fil (See also Shagar El Fil.)                        440, 619

  Sh’aibeit                                                          34

  Shaiir                                                            685

  Shaliga                                                           224

  Shammam                                                           164

  Shandaha                                                          765

  Shandahat                                                         765

  Sharoba                                                            34

  Shatta                                                            610

  Shau                                                              367

  Sheheit                                                           191

  Sheher                                                            619

  Sheiba                                                       104, 107

  Shekheit                                                          191

  Shelini                                                           320

  Shelsheleih                                                       855

  Shia                                                              562

  Shidr El Marfein                                                  478

  Shiltam                                                            51

  Shiltem                                                            51

  Shinemaq                                                          142

  Shirtem                                                            51

  Sholib                                                            119

  Shora                                                             700

  Shueika                                                           669

  Shuheit                                                           191

  Sibb El Ard                                                       657

  Sid                                                               827

  Siddir                                                            372

  Sim                                                               438

  Sim ahmar                                                         438

  Simeima                                                           895

  Simein                                                            478

  Sim El Far                                                        612

  Simsim                                                            664

  Simsim Afrit                                                      663

  Sinein                                                            287

  Singid                                                            340

  Sirh                                                               38

  Sirr El Ward                                                      533

  Snut                                                              287

  Soffar                                                            287

  Sofsaf (See also Safsaf.)                                         133

  Sogheit                                                      191, 478

  Subahi                                                            287

  Subakh                                                       188, 191

  Subakh Beida                                                      191

  Subakh Soda                                                       191

  Subaraya                                                          188

  Sumeima                                                      397, 895

  Sunt                                                              287

  Sura                                                              306

  Surep                                                             303

  Surib                                                   269, 306, 515

  Surraya                                                            37

  Surrakh                                                            38

  Surreih                                                        37, 38

  Suteib                                                             15

  Suteih                                                            202

  Suweid                                                            661

  Taghal                                                             42

  Takirni                                                      288, 478

  Taktak                                                            385

  Taktaka                                                           291

  Talha                                                             287

  Talh Beid                                                         287

  Talh Hamra                                                        287

  Tamaleika                                                          31

  Tamareib (See also Tambareib.)                                    188

  Tambareib (See also Tamareib.)                                    270

  Tamr                                                              814

  Tamr El Abid                                                 163, 199

  Tamr El Far                                                       130

  Tamr El Ghanam                                                    550

  Tamr Hindi                                                        275

  Taraktarak                                                        385

  Taraya                                                            343

  Tarba (See also Terba.)                                       84, 244

  Tarfa                                                             155

  Tartar                                                            210

  Tartus                                                             24

  Tatamba                                                           619

  Tauri                                                             306

  Tawila                                                       291, 326

  Tebeldi                                                           212

  Tebr                                                              618

  Teitalib                                                          865

  Telabun                                                           911

  Teleh                                                             287

  Tentit                                                            899

  Terba (See also Tarba.)                                      142, 244

  Tibn                                                              919

  Tibr                                                              618

  Til                                                               224

  Tileitilla                                                         35

  Timsahiya                                                          90

  Tirmis                                                            292

  Tomatum                                                           611

  Torfrid                                                           619

  Toto                                                              133

  Tubbur                                                            739

  Tukku                                                             199

  Tumam                                                             880

  Tumareib                                                          599

  Tundub                                                             34

  Tura                                                              497

  Turfas                                                            657

  Turor                                                             311

  Ullaf                                                             287

  Ulleya                                                            624

  Um Ankheit                                                        291

  Um Asaba                                                     908, 912

  Um Asleila                                                        895

  Um Atfeir                                                         303

  Um Baru                                                           218

  Um Begheil                                                        676

  Um Berru                                                          221

  Um Boru                                                           218

  Um Bukheisa                                                   33, 426

  Umbur                                                             218

  Um Dareiwa                                                        722

  Umdi Gulgul                                                       698

  Um Dileidman                                                      240

  Um Galagel                                                         22

  Um Galōt                                                          721

  Um Gereisat                                                   22, 619

  Um Ghaleila                                                       621

  Um Ghruf                                                          854

  Um Girsh                                                          288

  Um Habeiba                                                         44

  Um Hagri                                                          392

  Um Kalol                                                          478

  Um Kasho                                                          280

  Um Katshu                                                         269

  Um Khalatot                                                       199

  Um Kheit                                                           35

  Um Khirr                                                          873

  Um Kusm                                                           757

  Um Lebeina                                                   229, 460

  Um Manakhir                                                       602

  Um Mushbut                                                        756

  Um Rashad                                                         279

  Um Rehaun                                                         513

  Um Saba                                                           303

  Um Shalalo                                                        478

  Um Shara                                                          392

  Um Shebiti                                                        919

  Um She’era                                                        618

  Um Shiteih                                                        202

  Um Shutur                                                         662

  Um Shweika                                                        161

  Um Sisi                                                           352

  Um Subeiba                                                        895

  Um Suf                                                       844, 877

  Um Sumain                                                         191

  Um Suruj                                                          402

  Um Takirni                                                        288

  Um Teleih                                                         210

  Um Tugg                                                           825

  Ushar                                                             450

  Wadan El Far                                                      340

  Wade                                                               68

  Wad Masnab                                                        855

  Wassi                                                             161

  Weikah                                                            224

  Weikat El Badeib                                                  665

  Yabelayus                                                         199

  Yau                                                               478

  Yeir                                                              163

  Yo                                                                468

  Yoi                                                               362

  Yo’oi                                                             362

  Yusef effendi                                                     379

  Za’af El Fil                                                      757

  Za’an Sherab Elmi                                                 460

  Zabata                                                            814

  Zaghil                                                            543

  Zan                                                               329

  Zegai                                                              19

  Zegain                                                             19

  Zeitun                                                       428, 698

  Zerzereih                                                         855

  Zinzilakh                                                         390


                           =HADENDOWA NAMES=


  Abutkula         224, 771

  Agwait                460

  Ambarki               269

  Ankhau                229

  Ariai                 418

  Ariap                 418

  Arrad                 287

  Balud                 720

  Baras                 450

  Basadem               720

  Batt                  759

  Berba’a                30

  Berberan               30

  Brittein              176

  Bullas                255

  Dabalab               362

  Dadd’a                428

  Dahuab                756

  Daratniuwa            111

  Derbake               200

  Eigab            107, 724

  Eil Hāsal             368

  Einwi                 899

  Eirarib               154

  Fanteib               352

  Gabāt                 372

  Garrad                287

  Gum                   416

  Hadanit               701

  Hadembui              716

  Hamadab               402

  Hamashanak            608

  Hamashindi            362

  Hammadai              402

  Harfifoit              65

  Harnab                432

  Hashuk                544

  Heid                  229

  Hendamalawe           427

  Humar                 212

  Hunsig                895

  Hurgig                298

  Kāhab                 709

  Kalando               758

  Kaliah                709

  Kamop                  38

  Kareib                464

  Kāt-ut                375

  Keirani               524

  Koriāb                123

  Kureit                887

  Kwanab                569

  Lahla                 401

  Lalai                 401

  Magok                 443

  Maniop                608

  Mashab                889

  Meik                  366

  Meika-is              612

  Mūt                   249

  Nabbalam              718

  Ogoi                  267

  Ogum                  416

  Okrit                  71

  Olei                  532

  Orhan                 701

  Osar                  119

  Ot-Hauk               678

  Saddām                714

  Samōp                 401

  Samōt                 401

  Sangadd               300

  Sanganē               287

  Sanganeip             287

  Sarop                  34

  ’Sassud               382

  Sēmok                352

  Shaddeip               10

  Shāf                  191

  Shaleib                38

  Shashot               382

  Sheishig              117

  Shush                 880

  Tabar                 618

  Tagaba                372

  Tattas                399

  Tawar                 287

  Telgin                 68

  Termis                596

  Tilt                  352

  Timala                908

  Tishanu               613

  Tokshin               911

  Tomut                 199

  Torog                 827

  Towai                 287

  Tumbat                757

  Tumfar                895

  Waeila                895

  Wakerishaq             32

  Yam                    37


                            =RASHIDA NAMES=


  Agam          432

  Ardiakh       887

  Arrad         287

  Asham         827

  Dambotit      229

  Daro          189

  Dosh          544

  Eilab         895

  Erka          899

  Gamerōt       287

  Garrad        287

  Girgetti      362

  Gutab         117

  Habaleko      774

  Haiferet      515

  Hamalma       699

  Hamiltob      370

  Hedda         199

  Igla          911

  Kassla        372

  Metowi        375

  Milmilo       427

  Riktuda       249

  Rubel         524

  Sakbē         287

  Samūnat       613

  Sasa-dim      707

  Similul       895

  Sita           71

  Tahat         188

  Tarob         191

  Tashas        399

  Teimer         68

  Um Musēg      532

  Wagri         428

  Zeibug         32


                              =NUBA NAMES=


  Abelainy               287

  All’a                  269

  Amurte                 819

  Anaba                  370

  Ando                   819

  Anjera                 287

  Aruing                 199

  Ashāshi                269

  Ashāshini              269

  Atete                  375

  Auri                   229

  Barto                  284

  Bāsigsi                270

  Bokarak                210

  Boluki                 331

  Bombor                 255

  Buggultyen             239

  Burtūt                 906

  Bururu                  33

  Butnieid          218, 224

  Chuwei                   7

  Dā                     616

  Dagarag                438

  Daggāt                 818

  Dahkikak               414

  Danufi                 275

  Dillum                 368

  Doeiri                 218

  Doghing                 38

  Dombelabai             258

  Dullam                 352

  Dungur                 368

  Eibelainy              288

  Eigera                 199

  Eilukwaten             111

  Eirāl                  258

  Embeilu                689

  Fak                    212

  Fataa                  352

  Feider                 210

  Forwek                 287

  Furfurruk              377

  Gaggiam                818

  Garad                  287

  Giāt                   818

  Gillia                 757

  Hada              385, 386

  Heimor                 210

  Haggiarn               191

  Horuri                 392

  Imgeil                 229

  Imgyen                 287

  Indenu                 404

  Indyeik                352

  Ingyil                 370

  Jagia                  229

  Kadawdo                270

  Kailkail               306

  Kaitelang              269

  Kalialmo               287

  Kamre                   34

  Kandia                 287

  Kandimuwindi           722

  Kangaru                352

  Kari                   220

  Kariai                 819

  Karii             199, 661

  Karso                  191

  Kateing                  8

  Kaurdak                352

  Kaurok                 450

  Kawkawl                 22

  Kāwtāw                 287

  Kentii                 306

  Kētīer                 284

  Kharif                 388

  Kindal                 199

  Kindamoi               205

  Kirbi                  386

  Kirīd                  189

  Kirkongaw              270

  Kishawiyi              212

  Klieh                   33

  Kluruf                 698

  Kōi                    404

  Kokoro                 224

  Kolwakai                35

  Koptunindeir           722

  Korak                  382

  Kotundurak             413

  Kotwang                188

  Kuam                   199

  Kuashi                 275

  Kubdi                   34

  Kubuy                  270

  Kuguli                 599

  Kui                    190

  Kuii                   599

  Kulowi                 210

  Kuluwei                402

  Kung                   342

  Kuri                   382

  Kurinyil               397

  Kuruwang               352

  Kuruwi                 497

  Kusi                   191

  Kussi                  287

  Kwae                   191

  Kwaii                  372

  Kwakelang              599

  Kwar              284, 418

  Kwarnyāl               701

  Kweinde                224

  Kweile                 287

  Kweyi                  352

  Lagi                   385

  Lambūri                450

  Levii                  364

  Luæ                    618

  Luī               199, 925

  Ma                     287

  Madimu                 698

  Magal                  480

  Main                   287

  Maintu                 478

  Mansallo               212

  Marte                  191

  M’bra                  188

  Me                     287

  Meirten                362

  Meremeret              397

  Mindigīri              191

  Minkigili              288

  Muarta                  34

  Munli                  818

  Nagan                  287

  Najikar                226

  Naliak                 757

  Nalti                  368

  Narura                 758

  Narurai                438

  N’darabwa              413

  N’daru                 191

  N’dmusso               382

  N’dula                 661

  N’guhin                352

  N’gwani                352

  Nihing                 352

  Nimardak               240

  Ogūn                   450

  Ora                    212

  Orbol                  288

  Orūm                   342

  Pankaja                287

  Pwa                    255

  Rīs                    229

  Rrek                   352

  Rruk                   757

  Rūt                    478

  Shaleih                287

  Shaleih-Wiwi           287

  Shangye                430

  Sheiala                352

  Shekere                275

  Shimeil                 34

  Shireih                865

  Shirgi                 189

  Shūm                   418

  Shumti                 329

  Sirtu                  287

  Suk                    288

  Sukosuko               663

  Tal               352, 925

  Tambui                 331

  Tamuru                 189

  Tarme                  614

  Tarwara                270

  Teide                  515

  Teili                  287

  Teterling              661

  Tidogi                 698

  Timla                  662

  Timleirruk             497

  Tindure                368

  Tingāligāli            352

  Tingra                 372

  Tintukuki              426

  Tinturing              478

  Tira                   382

  Tirigo                 287

  Tirling                 35

  Tittawyi               372

  Tuberli                212

  Tudu                   618

  Tùlung                 397

  Tumbu              38, 199

  Tumu                   438

  Tūr                    697

  Tūt                    287

  Ubūn                   450

  Ulgyin                 375

  Umdamun                478

  Ungus                  287

  Urād                   287

  Urūm                   287

  Zān                    599


                             =DINKA NAMES=


  Abangiur                                  375

  Abban                                      34

  Addit                                     311

  Adelfur                                   693

  Adīt                                      311

  Adong                                     480

  Afat                                      618

  Afiat (See also Apiat.)                    38

  Afinin                                    432

  Afor                                      199

  Afwār                                     199

  Agadiang                                  256

  Aganama                                   602

  Aghei                                     478

  Agowyak-Wyak                              367

  Ajoak                                     873

  Akaki                                      31

  Akam                                      877

  Akamil                                    404

  Akia                                  30, 297

  Akieira                                   515

  Akiul                                     367

  Akog                                      599

  Akoit                                     599

  Akon                                 279, 461

  Akosh                                     599

  Akuwat                                    362

  Alabu                                     919

  Alas                                      227

  Aldukoi                                   148

  Allok                                     882

  Allwi                                     287

  Alonkoy                                   401

  Alume                                     684

  Amagak                                    579

  Ammal                                     105

  Ammet                                     189

  Anan                                      287

  Aneit                                  37, 38

  Angoto                                    468

  Anyain                                     61

  Apet                                      164

  Apiat                                     230

  Apinrot                                     8

  Apor                                      199

  Areng                                     375

  Arnīk                                     375

  Arur                                      892

  Ashenon                                   460

  Ashwal                                    367

  Ashwel                                    367

  Atendit                                   199

  Atīl                                      669

  Atitāk                                    608

  Atīydok                                   287

  Ban                                        34

  Belin                                     274

  Bende                                     288

  Bī                                        287

  Bindi                                     283

  Birr                                      435

  Biut                                       33

  Bol                                       229

  Borid                                      34

  Bual                                      229

  Bulakolin                                 375

  But                                   37, 756

  Chiandak                                  287

  Chiandok                                  287

  Chuwalageir                               135

  Dai                                       652

  Daritar                              381, 470

  Daung                                     480

  Diagne                                    291

  Digdig                                    343

  Ditaak                                    608

  Dong                                      480

  Dungwol                                   212

  Donjijuak                                 348

  Dunk                                      480

  Erianga                                   272

  Errit                                     342

  Fiit                                      287

  Fiok                                      188

  Fog                                        35

  Fomah                                     224

  Gadiang                                   256

  Galanva                                   515

  Getaki                                     81

  Ghanem                                    244

  Gniōr                                     229

  Goak                                      191

  Godobo                                    396

  Grename                                   326

  Gudi                                      276

  Gunkeit                                   199

  Hrerva                                    550

  Jier                                      282

  Kai                                        33

  Kait                                  33, 599

  Kam                                       877

  Kara                                      618

  Kat                                        33

  Kem                                       199

  Ki                                        284

  Kiar                                      269

  Kiat                                      599

  Kīr                                       284

  Kit                                        33

  Kiungwan                                  369

  Knār                                      459

  Koba                                      272

  Kog                               33, 37, 287

  Konaiyer                                  287

  Kongoggoi                                 661

  Konink                                    698

  Konyai                                    287

  Kuru                                      278

  Kuum                                      479

  Kwel                                      352

  Kwuil                                     367

  Lag                                       352

  Lakshuai                                   61

  Lānf                                      372

  Lang                                      372

  Lant                                      372

  Lefir                                      22

  Linga                                     188

  Lo                                        300

  Lom                                        86

  Lublub                                    199

  Lung                                      133

  Madiab-diab                               257

  Mana                                      430

  Melat                                     368

  Mella                                     181

  Milloa                                    288

  Nagap                                     352

  Narah                                     287

  Neit                                       37

  N’gab                                     352

  Nguassa                                   283

  Nianlalwel                                420

  Niat                                      819

  Niok                                      781

  Nua                                       901

  Nūr                                       865

  Odiloh                                    430

  Pai                                       270

  Pait                                      287

  Paj                                       270

  Phuk                                      188

  Phut                                      394

  Poik                                      394

  Rak                                       419

  Ratt                                      287

  Rāwar                                     662

  Red                                       342

  Rēt                                       342

  Riang                                     273

  Riat                                       34

  Rīt                                       342

  Rur                                       892

  Ruwāl                                     662

  Shanda                                    274

  Shat                                      599

  Shat-Akog                                 599

  Shīr                                      284

  Shom                                 417, 418

  Showi                                     275

  Shwai                                     275

  Shwayai                                   275

  Siap                                      288

  Taam                                      819

  Tab                                       616

  Tabbo                                     616

  Tanga                                     178

  Tar                                       757

  Tau                                       382

  Tchuwoi                                   275

  Teb                                       142

  Tep                                       287

  Thiepagok (See also Tipagok.)             278

  Til                                       669

  Till                                      685

  Tip                                       287

  Tīpagok (See also Thiepagok.)             287

  Tit                                       393

  Tonyangwi                                 794

  Tu                                        382

  Tuk                                       818

  Wor                                       311

  Wuliado                                   661

  Yolovan                                   908


                              =JUR NAMES=


  Abdalour             164

  Adit                 352

  Adot                 352

  Adwang               480

  Akalakwala           148

  Akan                 236

  Akanja               480

  Akatagan             288

  Akit                 147

  Aknalkuala           401

  Akos            381, 470

  Akuti                276

  Alema                368

  Amau                 370

  Ambalu                 8

  Apwamah              430

  Aray                  35

  Ariengo              329

  Atilob               430

  Bei                  273

  Biama                468

  Bindi                283

  Birkwa               478

  Denya                420

  Dera                 191

  Digdig               343

  Fiok                 188

  Gari                 352

  Kadol                282

  Kamutwen             794

  Koba                 272

  Kolu                 278

  Kudul                156

  Kula                 182

  Kuloh                182

  Kwaya                352

  Nianlalwel           420

  Nwana                279

  Okil                 269

  Paj                  270

  Payo                 352

  Phut                 394

  Poh                  188

  Rak                  419

  Rīt                  342

  Shanda               274

  Showi                275

  Tanga                178

  Tau                  382

  Tido                 393

  Tiro                 393

  Toi                  757

  Toiro                757

  Tuk                  818

  Ungono                34

  Winga                  4

  Yalah                698

  Yau                  419

  Yiad                 375


                              =GOLO NAMES=


  Abro                   36

  Agua                  182

  Agud                  182

  Akka                  272

  Aklimbo               480

  Alimu                 368

  Arub                  275

  Atoka                  35

  Attab                 789

  Baa                   419

  Bafi                    8

  Bak                   419

  Bakango               284

  Bak-Bele               38

  Bamburti              199

  Bangi            278, 435

  Bei              278, 420

  Bejugolo                5

  Bekili                288

  Bele                  393

  Bembu                 191

  Bende                 288

  Bī                    420

  Bih                   430

  Bili                  381

  Binda                 274

  Biri                  288

  Bishi                 283

  Bokango               342

  Boli                  348

  Bologu                426

  Boyeh                 269

  Bu                    274

  Bururu                139

  Butrungu              515

  Chii             480, 756

  Chinya                348

  Choko                 661

  Chumu                 418

  Da                    210

  Dalade                756

  Dalanze               818

  Dele                  375

  Dere                   20

  Dileh                 756

  Du                      8

  Dungdung              404

  Dungo                 430

  Ebanos                342

  Euwi                  199

  Fiawe                 188

  Fungu                 352

  Gafa                  662

  Gafele                269

  Gana                  343

  Gara                  236

  Gasse                 352

  Gumberti              394

  Gumboto               362

  Iji                   282

  Inji                  282

  Inzi                  230

  Irdoko                420

  Ivi                   430

  Jekoro                336

  Ji                    282

  Ka                    272

  Kandi                 210

  Kela                  352

  Klanda                402

  Kofo                  279

  Koh                   431

  Korongo               182

  Koropongo             238

  Krupu                 368

  Kuvu                  352

  Kwange                236

  Kwiella               270

  Langabo               787

  Loigo                 276

  Loyo                  276

  Lu                    279

  Mana                  191

  Manga-manga            34

  M’ba                  189

  M’banda                 5

  M’banga               346

  M’base                286

  M’bili           381, 470

  M’bolo           276, 343

  M’bosso               283

  Merekoti              375

  M’komve               364

  M’na                  191

  Mporo                 276

  Mundongo              479

  N’dala                430

  N’du               8, 466

  N’du-N’du             402

  N’dungo               468

  Nu                      8

  Oro                   698

  Ou                    788

  Palanjeke             498

  Pelle                 432

  Pighadi               426

  Pili                  420

  Po                    273

  Poro                    5

  Rivia                 419

  Rupu                  368

  Sabrongo              392

  Sekia                 377

  Shomu            417, 418

  Singa                 189

  Sioro                 188

  Sorongo               382

  Tepelu                191

  Tina                  348

  Tindi                 432

  Tiri             381, 470

  To                    188

  Ulu                   279

  Ulumba                199

  Uru                   291

  Usin                  270

  Vanga                 430

  Vulasin               401

  Wassa                 275

  Wungo                 352

  Yagomo                325

  Yamala                479

  Yukdashi              234

  Zebalaba              369

  Zili                  394


                              =BARI NAMES=


  Bakka               258

  Bakungi             229

  Basha               275

  Bogweh              191

  Budu                 38

  Chawdaw             599

  Daya                 36

  Dikeri Timallo      109

  Dufiti              480

  Faiti               342

  Fik                 377

  Fufumi              229

  Funiti              342

  Gagali              756

  Injir               818

  Kadofi              287

  Kafito               38

  Kayu                369

  Keir                819

  Kelisho             352

  Kīr                 393

  Kireilli            383

  Kitteh              275

  Kubuli              662

  Kukati              287

  Kuluji              478

  Kumi                418

  Kurreh              367

  Lakbur              224

  Lakudi              344

  Lallok              382

  Lamraga             109

  Langi               372

  Lelinga              19

  Lodoreh             375

  Loring              156

  Lufari              367

  Lujurut             661

  Lukati              372

  Lulumeh              34

  Lumili              382

  Mandomi             288

  Mat                 404

  Mit                 287

  Mojungi             375

  Mutu                287

  Niada                37

  Nieteh               38

  Owi                 600

  Patta               275

  Poffeh              270

  Pukuli              287

  Rega                191

  Riadi                34

  Rileh               284

  Rufi                404

  Shadashu            599

  Sirkuka             432

  Surreh              362

  Tarasho             618

  Teleleh             608

  Tifta                33

  Tunusho             819

  Yakadi              601


                             =HAMEG NAMES=


  Agaili                      33

  Allanfa                    404

  Angaloa                    199

  Antamana-wanshu            199

  Arakh                      352

  Arbit                      284

  Argada                     191

  Bagu                       287

  Baidi                      199

  Banjam                     599

  Bazi                       191

  Bibi                       368

  Bizu                       599

  Busa                       372

  Damfulan                   386

  Derder                     205

  Deza                       280

  Eru                        155

  Garandak-Meshirg-edin      287

  Ghot                       372

  Gora                       819

  Gulgula                    385

  Hollola                    255

  Immirora                   343

  Karan                      224

  Kha                        382

  Khai                       189

  Kora                       270

  Kowa                       402

  Kurmuz                     199

  Malat                      275

  Mali                       239

  Medera                     925

  Mela                       287

  Merish                     375

  Merzis                     682

  Mosaghani                  286

  Muggal                     270

  Nensha                     352

  Oba                        352

  Odu                        287

  Omfa                       210

  Omkursan                   372

  Runda                      480

  Shebil                     287

  Shugeit                    515

  Shunshumut                 255

  Tari                       342

  Tharat                     352

  Tishu                      392

  Uffa                       212

  Um-Flogoru                 269

  Uru                        349


                              =NUER NAMES=


  Bam            287

  Bara           224

  Bell           855

  Bul Gwath      315

  Bull           229

  Bwau           372

  Dang           270

  Daya           819

  Deb             35

  Deuganai       375

  Daub           172

  Fap            255

  Fath           801

  Fiath          382

  Gel            342

  Gok            191

  Kaich           33

  Kam            199

  Kof            739

  Kuar           275

  Kurr           892

  Kürwai         117

  Kusha          212

  Kuz            877

  Kwät           275

  Kwil           367

  Kwir           892

  Kwoich         362

  Lao            468

  Lau            925

  Lēl            819

  Luēl           662

  Lûôr           287

  Lurr           342

  Maintaf        840

  Mêt            189

  Nak            662

  Nap            352

  Ngêiny         865

  Ngof           352

  Ngwaïn         270

  Ngwēr          287

  Niot           599

  Nium           664

  Nurr           818

  Nyuat          599

  Pau            367

  Riëk           419

  Rir            394

  Rur            311

  Tau            382

  Ted            224

  Tef            287

  Teib           287

  Tiit            38

  Tol            616

  Twâl            15

  Tyef           311

  Wigar          886

  Yell           827


                            =SHILLUK NAMES=


  Abertgh      164

  Abudeh        33

  Adhwag       287

  Afiad        287

  Age          461

  Agwar        288

  Alabu        919

  Allad        287

  Aroa         901

  Ashar        287

  Awolam       352

  But           34

  Delpa        693

  Gag          212

  Goi          599

  Kayu         819

  Kilutum      105

  Kiroh        284

  Lāng         372

  Nangot        34

  Niarud       287

  Nun          841

  Obailoh      367

  Ofadoh       199

  Shwah        275

  Tiap         287

  Tu           382


                             =BURUN NAMES=


  Boadun            191

  Bimya             288

  Bul               212

  Bun                38

  Dig               478

  Digra             282

  Dili              199

  Dilman            199

  Foicha            270

  Funna             661

  Giuom             342

  Kabti             404

  Kafa              269

  Kelaiin           199

  Kitchun           284

  Kilko             394

  Leng              287

  Mell              685

  Mienna            417

  Munda             375

  Taang             819

  Tianka            756

  Tilla        284, 402

  Toan              382

  Towollo           386

  Yenno             275

  Yin               189


                             =BONGO NAMES=


  Airi                 282

  Bakwa                332

  Gall                 282

  Gare                 236

  Gere                 236

  Gier            282, 283

  Gurfa                188

  Kakob                229

  Kahili               394

  Kawbaw               272

  Kela                 274

  Kholo                291

  Kindi                713

  Koar                 419

  Kobbo                271

  Koell                911

  Kolome               418

  Kor                  419

  Kori                 419

  Kubo                 352

  Kuga-Tabba            88

  Kugo                 480

  Lebbe                346

  Maha                 275

  Makpara              772

  Malagutu             276

  Mamele-ba            480

  Mashir               616

  Masisi               269

  M’balim              288

  M’banga              346

  Munoh                430

  M’volo               368

  Ngeleh               430

  Ru                   279

  Siringa              189

  Tabba                616

  Tirma                343


                             =ZANDE NAMES=


  Abagpa            332

  Abanza            275

  Abongba           279

  Aduraka            25

  Akori             797

  Ambiria           618

  Awirki            291

  Babwa             245

  Bagbodi           236

  Bakaipur          188

  Bakiwe            479

  Bambe             618

  Banga             189

  Bangribakake      329

  Barakuri          756

  Barandoka         779

  Baranga           757

  Barisango         661

  Bazambe           618

  Baze              191

  Bazmangi          245

  Bedigawa          801

  Bianga            480

  Bingba            853

  Bira              801

  Blippo            478

  Bodumoh           827

  Bofufa            529

  Boggumboli        801

  Bogora              8

  Bogu              393

  Boo               801

  Bovotode          274

  Bunga             255

  Daglie            287

  Dagpa             270

  Damma             466

  Ditira            172

  Doma              466

  Garo              278

  Gundeh            616

  Inge              282

  Irrik             278

  Jiango            679

  Kawkaw            855

  Kinge             814

  Kiski             375

  Kofokofo          468

  Kolome            418

  Kopa              330

  Kukuroku          211

  Kure              311

  Manzi             744

  Maro              911

  Maydok            779

  M’badi            435

  M’begge           480

  M’buru            210

  Mere              779

  Metemboa          205

  Monu              911

  Morambida         202

  Murie Paï           1

  N’ganzi           925

  N’ganziduper      892

  Nomba             224

  Nonga             797

  Nyti              779

  N’zangarne        288

  Nzeebee           224

  N’zummunia        394

  Okwa              818

  Pangbaduper       739

  Pawe              273

  Pipi              175

  Podo              816

  Poigo             199

  Popogi            432

  Popuki            892

  Popwa             205

  Purpur            205

  Ramu              227

  Rangbarangbo      662

  Raria             610

  Ratu              269

  Rindichwe         432

  Rokko             352

  Roko              227

  Rungaime           15

  Sanambiri         182

  Sarah             664

  Tingitingi        801

  Vunde             855

  Vurra             287

  Wande             315

  Weeda             402

  Zangare           282

  Zawa              178

  Zidi              344


                              =KREJ NAMES=


  Durar         283

  Juyo          608

  Kotto           1

  Koyo          352

  Nzerahna      331

  Sussi         430

  Tu            652

  Wawa          430


                             =INDOGO NAMES=


  Bih        430

  Koh        431

  Kotto        1


                           =TUKU-TUKU NAMES=


  Dawa Na Samaki (See Arabic Names.)     181


                             =KALIKO NAMES=


  Doro       350

  Kapah      231


                            =MAKRAKA NAMES=


  Kawa      196


                        INDEX TO GENERIC NAMES.


                           SERIAL NO.

  Abrus                           325

  Abutilon                        218

  Acacia                          287

  Acalypha                        249

  Acanthus                        677

  Achyranthes                     111

  Achyrocline                     535

  Acrocephalus                    703

  Acroceras                       878

  Acrospira                       763

  Adansonia                       212

  Adenia                          156

  Adenium                         438

  Adenodolichos                   338

  Adenopus                        159

  Adenostemma                     518

  Adina                           467

  Æluropus                        922

  Æolanthus                       711

  Ærva                            107

  Æschynomene                     312

  Afrormosia                      346

  _Afzelia_                     _273_

  Agelæa                          406

  Ageratum                        519

  Aizoon                           85

  Ajuga                           725

  Albizzia                        288

  Albuca                          770

  Alchornea                       251

  Alectra                         650

  Alhagi                          310

  Alisma                          726

  Allium                          767

  Alloteropsis                    871

  Aloe                            758

  _Alsodeia_                     _56_

  Alstonia                        435

  Alternanthera                   113

  Alysicarpus                     320

  Amanoa                          232

  Amaralia                        481

  Amaranthus                      106

  Amblygonocarpus                 283

  Ambrosia                        546

  Ammannia                        130

  Amomum                          797

  Amorphophallus                  742

  Ampelocissus                    374

  Amphilophis                     860

  Anagallis                       593

  Anastatica                       43

  Anchomanes                      743

  Ancistrophyllum                 817

  Andira                          345

  Andrachne                       233

  Andropogon                      864

  Aneilema                        782

  Angræcum                        807

  Anisopappus                     545

  Anogeissus                      189

  Anona                             8

  Anthephora                      885

  Anthericum                      764

  Antherotoma                     185

  Anthocleista                    425

  Anthospermum                    475

  Antiaris                        353

  Anticharis                      631

  Antidesma                       234

  Antirrhinum                     636

  Aponogeton                      734

  Aporrhiza                       398

  Aptosimum                       630

  Arachis                         315

  Arenaria                         74

  Argemone                         27

  Argyrolobium                    293

  Aristida                        895

  Aristolochia               22, _23_

  Arnebia                         606

  Arthraxon                       859

  Arthrocnemum                    100

  Arthrosolen                     140

  Asclepias                       452

  Ascolepis                       835

  Asparagus                       756

  Asphodelus                      760

  Aspilia                         553

  Astragalus                      307

  Astrochlæna                     621

  Asystasia                       681

  Atriplex                         97

  Avena                           890

  Avicennia                       700

  Azadirachta                     389

  Balanites                       382

  Barleria                        678

  Basella                         114

  Bauhinia                        270

  Becium                          706

  Belmontia                       586

  Bergia                           71

  Berkheya                        568

  Berlinia                        272

  Bidens                          560

  Biophytum                       125

  Biserula                        302

  Bixa                            146

  Blæria                          415

  Blainvillea                     552

  Blepharis                       676

  Blumea                          529

  Boehmeria                       357

  Boerhaavia                      142

  Bonatea                         812

  Bootia                          750

  Borassus                        818

  Boscia                           35

  Boswellia                       385

  Bouchea                         692

  Brachiaria                      873

  Brachycorythis                  811

  Brachystelma                    462

  Bridelia                        230

  Bromus                          923

  Bruguiera                       193

  Bryonopsis                      165

  Bryophyllum                      64

  Buchnera                        651

  Bulbine                         761

  Bulbostylis                     831

  Burkea                          277

  Burnatia                        731

  Butomopsis                      733

  Butyrospermum                   419

  Byrsocarpus                     405

  Cadaba                           37

  Cadalvena                       795

  Cæsalpinia                      266

  Cajanus                         339

  Calamus                         816

  Caldenia                        727

  Caloncoba                       149

  Calonyction                     620

  Calotropis                      450

  Campanula                       585

  Canarium                        387

  Canavalia                       331

  Cannabis                        361

  Canscora                        589

  Canthium                        490

  Caperonia                       243

  Capparis                         34

  Capsicum                        610

  Caralluma                       464

  Cardiospermum                   396

  Carica                          175

  Carissa                         432

  Carthamus                       571

  Casearia                        152

  Cassia                          269

  Caylusea                         57

  Ceiba                           213

  Celosia                         104

  Celtis                          258

  Cenchrus                        887

  Centaurea                       570

  Cephaëlis                       504

  Cephalandra                     173

  Cephalocroton                   246

  Cerastium                        73

  Ceratophyllum                    14

  Ceratotheca                     665

  Ceropegia                       461

  Ceruana                         525

  Chætacme                        260

  Chasmanthera                     18

  Chasmopodium                    851

  Chenopodium                      96

  Chloris                         908

  Chlorophora                     350

  Chlorophytum                    765

  Christiana                      198

  Chrozophora                     244

  Chrysanthellum                  561

  Chrysopogon                     857

  Cicer                           321

  Cienfuegosia                    225

  Cissampelos                      20

  Cissus                          275

  Cistanche                       657

  Citrullus                       172

  Citrus                          379

  Clausena                        378

  Clematis                         10

  Clematopsis                      11

  Cleome                           30

  Clerodendron                    699

  Clinogyne                       799

  Clitandra                       431

  Clitoria                        326

  Cnestis                         407

  Cocculus                         19

  Cochlospermum                   147

  Coelachyrum                     910

  Coffea                          499

  Coldenia                        601

  Cola                            211

  Coleus                          709

  Colocasia                       744

  Combretum                       191

  Cometes                          93

  Commelina                       781

  Commiphora                      386

  Conopharyngia                   437

  Convolvulus                     624

  Conyza                          528

  Corallocarpus                   170

  Corchorus                       202

  Cordia                          599

  Cordyla                         348

  Coreopsis                       559

  Coriandrum                      414

  Cornulaca                       103

  Corymbis                        808

  Costus                          796

  Cotula                          562

  Courbonia                        36

  Cratæva                          33

  Craterispermum                  496

  Craterostigma                   644

  Cremaspora                      488

  Crepis                          576

  Cressa                          628

  Crinum                          787

  Crossandra                      680

  Crossopteryx                    470

  Crotalaria                      291

  Croton                          240

  Cryptolepis                     439

  Ctenium                         909

  Ctenolepis                      171

  Cucumis                         164

  Cucurbita                       174

  Culcasia                        745

  Curculigo                       786

  Cuscuta                         629

  Cyamopsis                       299

  Cyanotis                        783

  Cyathula                        108

  _Cyclostemon_                 _237_

  Cycnium                         654

  Cymbopogon                      865

  Cymodocea                       737

  Cynanchum                       454

  Cynodon                         906

  Cynoglossum                     604

  Cyperus                         827

  Dactyloctenium                  912

  Dæmia                           457

  Dalbergia                       342

  Dalechampia                     256

  Daniellia                       274

  Danthonia                       891

  Dasystachys                     766

  Datura                          614

  Desmodium                       317

  Desmonema                        17

  Desmostachya                    900

  Detarium                        276

  Dichanthium                     861

  Dichapetalum                    265

  Dichondra                       627

  Dichrocephala                   523

  Dichrostachys                   284

  Dicliptera                      687

  Dicoma                          572

  Dicranolepis                    141

  Diectomis                       863

  Digera                          105

  Digitaria                       870

  Dinebra                         913

  Diodia                          505

  Dioscorea                       779

  Diospyros                       418

  Dipcadi                         768

  Diplachne                       902

  Diplacrum                       838

  Diplolophium                    410

  Diplotaxis                       46

  Dipterygium                      32

  Dissotis                        186

  Dobera                          366

  Dodonæa                         399

  Dolichos                        336

  Dombeya                         205

  Dopatrium                       642

  Dorstenia                       351

  Dracæna                         759

  Drimia                          769

  Drosera                          69

  Drypetes                        237

  Duranta                         696

  Dyschoriste                     670

  Ecbolium                        686

  Echidnopsis                     463

  Echinochilon                    605

  Echinochloa                     877

  Echinodorus                     730

  Echinops                        569

  Echium                          607

  Eclipta                         550

  Ehretia                         600

  Eichornia                       775

  Ekebergia                       391

  Elæis                           821

  Elæodendron                     363

  Eleocharis                      829

  Elephantopus                    517

  Eleusine                        911

  Elyonurus                       848

  Elytraria                       667

  Elytrophorus                    921

  Embelia                         422

  Emilia                          564

  Enarthrocarpus                   51

  Encephalartos                     1

  Englerastrum                    710

  Enhydra                         549

  Enicostema                      588

  Enneapogon                      917

  Entada                          280

  Enteropogon                     907

  Epaltes                         532

  Ephedra                           2

  Epilobium                       136

  Eragrostis                      901

  Eranthemum                      682

  Eremopogon                      858

  Eriocaulon                      823

  Eriochloa                       872

  _Eriodendron_                 _213_

  Eriosema                        341

  Eriospermum                     762

  Eriospora                       839

  Erlangea                        514

  Erodium                         123

  Eruca                            47

  Erythrina                       329

  Erythrococca                    247

  Erythrophlæum                   278

  Ethulia                         513

  Euclea                          416

  Eulophia                        804

  Eupatorium                      520

  Euphorbia                       229

  Eureiandra                      162

  Evolvulus                       625

  Fadogia                         494

  Fagonia                         119

  Faroa                           587

  Farsetia                         44

  Felicia                         526

  Feretia                         484

  Ficus                           352

  Fimbristylis                    830

  Flacourtia                      151

  Fleurya                         355

  Floscopa                        784

  Fluggea                         239

  Fœniculum                       411

  Forskohlea                      360

  Frankenia                       154

  Fuirena                         833

  Fumaria                          28

  Gaillonia                       506

  Galium                          511

  Garcinia                        197

  Gardenia                        480

  Geigeria                        544

  Geophila                        503

  Geranium                        122

  Gerbera                         574

  Gisekia                          82

  Gladiolus                       792

  Glinus                           81

  Gloriosa                        774

  Glossonema                      446

  Glycine                         327

  Glycyrrhiza                     308

  Glyphæa                         203

  Gnaphalium                      536

  Gnidia                          138

  _Gomphia_                     _197_

  Gossypium                       227

  Grangea                         524

  Grewia                          199

  Guettarda                       486

  Guiera                          190

  Guizotia                        558

  Gymnema                         458

  Gymnosporia                     362

  Gynandropsis                     31

  Gynura                          563

  Habenaria                       810

  Hæmanthus                       788

  Halopeplis                       99

  Halophila                       752

  Hannoa                          380

  Haronga                         196

  Harrisonia                      383

  Heleochloa                      893

  Heliotropium                    602

  Helichrysum                     537

  _Helmia_                      _779_

  Helminthocarpum                 301

  Hemigraphis                     675

  Hermannia                       208

  Herminiera                      311

  Heterachæna                     578

  Heteranthera                    776

  Heteropogon                     868

  Hexalobus                         5

  Hibiscus                        224

  Hippocratea                     364

  Hochstetteria                   573

  Homalium                        153

  Honckenya                       201

  Hoslundia                       707

  Huernia                         465

  Hugonia                         116

  Hybanthus                        55

  Hydnora                          24

  Hydrilla                        746

  Hydrocotyle                     408

  Hydrolea                        598

  Hygrophila                      669

  Hymenocardia                    236

  Hymenodictyon                   469

  Hyoscyamus                      615

  Hyparrhenia                     866

  Hypericum                       194

  Hyphæne                         819

  Hypoestes                       689

  Hypoxis                         785

  Hyptis                          713

  Ilysanthes                      647

  Impatiens                       126

  Imperata                        853

  Indigofera                      300

  Inula                           539

  _Ionidium_                     _55_

  Iphiona                         540

  Ipomœa                          618

  Irvingia                        381

  Ischæmum                        841

  Isoberlinia                     271

  Ixora                           497

  Jacquemontia                    623

  Jardinea                        845

  Jasminum                        427

  Jatropha                        241

  Juncellus                       826

  Jussieua                        133

  Justicia                        684

  Kæmpferia                       794

  Kalanchoe                        65

  Kanahia                         451

  Kedrostis                       169

  Khaya                           393

  Kigelia                         662

  Klainedoxa                      384

  Kochia                           98

  Kosteletzkya                    222

  Kyllinga                        824

  Lactuca                         577

  Lagarosiphon                    747

  Lagenaria                       160

  Laggera                         530

  Landolphia                      430

  Lantana                         690

  Lapeyrousia                     790

  Lasiosiphon                     139

  Lasiurus                        847

  Lathyrus                        324

  Latipes                         897

  Laurembergia                    137

  Lawsonia                        131

  Lavandula                       714

  Leersia                         920

  Lemna                           753

  Lens                            323

  Leonitis                        722

  Lepidagathis                    683

  Lepidium                         49

  Lepidoturus                     250

  Lepistemon                      622

  Leptadenia                      460

  Leptochloa                      903

  Leptonychia                     209

  Leucas                          721

  Leysera                         538

  Lightfootia                     582

  Limeum                           84

  Limnanthemum                    591

  Limnophila                      640

  Limnophyton                     728

  Linaria                         633

  Lindenbergia                    638

  Lindernia                       646

  Lindukeria                      150

  Linociera                       429

  Linum                           115

  Lipocarpha                      834

  Lippia                          691

  Lissochilus                     805

  Lobelia                         581

  Lonchocarpus                    344

  Lophira                         178

  Lophotocarpus                   729

  Loranthus                       370

  Lotononis                       289

  Lotus                           297

  Ludwigia                        134

  Luffa                           161

  Lupinus                         292

  Lycium                          613

  Lycopersicum                    611

  Maba                            417

  Macaranga                       254

  Macrosphyra                     482

  Mærua                            38

  Mæsa                            421

  Mæsobotrya                      235

  Mæsopsis                        373

  Malachra                        219

  Mallotus                        253

  Malva                           214

  Malvastrum                      215

  Mangifera                       400

  Manihot                         245

  Manisuris                       846

  Manniophyton                    242

  Margaretta                      453

  Mariscus                        828

  Marsdenia                       459

  Matthiola                        40

  Medemia                         820

  Medicago                        295

  Megabaria                       231

  Megaclinium                     803

  Meiocarpidium                     4

  Melanthera                      555

  Melhania                        204

  Melia                           390

  Melinis                         884

  Melochia                        206

  Melothria                       168

  Mentha                          715

  Merremia                        619

  Meyna                           492

  Micrargeria                     656

  Microchloa                      905

  Micrococca                      248

  Microglossa                     527

  Micromeria                      716

  Microstylis                     802

  Microtrichia                    522

  Mikania                         521

  Milletia                        305

  Mimosa                          286

  Mimulus                         643

  Mimusops                        420

  Mitracarpum                     509

  Mitragyne                       468

  Mohlana                          94

  _Molium_                      _767_

  Mollugo                          80

  Momordica                       163

  Monechma                        685

  Moniera                         641

  Monochoria                      777

  Monocymbium                     867

  Monodora                          9

  Monotes                         181

  Monsonia                        121

  Morelia                         479

  Morettia                         42

  Morinda                         501

  Moringa                          39

  Moschosma                       704

  Mostuea                         423

  Mucuna                          330

  Mukia                           166

  Mundulea                        304

  Musa                            801

  Mussænda                        474

  Naias                           736

  Nasturtium                       41

  Nelsonia                        668

  Neoboutonia                     252

  Nepeta                          718

  Neptunia                        285

  Nervilia                        809

  Nesæa                           129

  Neuracanthus                    679

  Neurada                         264

  Neurotheca                      590

  Nicotiana                       616

  Nigella                          13

  Notonia                         565

  Nuxia                           424

  Nymphæa                          15

  Ochna                           177

  Ochradenus                       60

  Ocimum                   701, _706_

  Octodon                         508

  Odina                           402

  Oldenlandia                     473

  Olea                            428

  Oligomeris                       59

  Olyra                           924

  Omphalogonus                    442

  Oncoba                          148

  Ophiurus                        850

  Opilia                          369

  Oplismenus                      879

  Opuntia                         176

  Ornithogalum                    773

  Orobanche                       658

  Orthosiphon                     705

  Orygia                           79

  Oryza                           919

  Osbeckia                 184, _186_

  Otomeria                        472

  Otostegia                       720

  Ottelia                         749

  Ouratea                         179

  Oxalis                          124

  Oxyanthus                       483

  Oxygonum                         89

  Oxystelma                       448

  Oxytenanthera                   925

  Pahudia                         273

  Palisota                        780

  Pancratium                      789

  Pandanus                        822

  Pandiaka                        112

  Panicum                         880

  Pararistolochia                  23

  Parietaria                      358

  Parinarium                      262

  Parkia                          279

  Parkinsonia                     268

  Paronychia                       92

  Paspalidium                     875

  Paspalum                        874

  Paullinia                       395

  Paulo-Wilhelmia                 672

  Pavetta                         498

  Pavonia                         221

  Pegolettia                      541

  Pennisetum                      886

  Pentanisia                      487

  Pentas                          471

  Pentatropis                     456

  Peperomia                        26

  Peponia                         157

  Periploca                       443

  Peristrophe                     688

  Perotis                         898

  Peucedanum                      413

  Phagnalon                       534

  Phaseolus                       332

  Phaylopsis                      673

  Phœnix                          814

  Phragmites                      892

  Phyllanthus                     238

  Physalis                        609

  Phytolacca                       95

  Picridium                       579

  Pimpinella                      409

  Piper                            25

  Piptadenia                      281

  Pistia                          739

  Pittosporum                     145

  Plantago                        597

  Platycoryne                     813

  Platystoma                      702

  Plectranthus                    708

  Pleiocarpa                      434

  Pluchea                         531

  Plumbago                        596

  Podostelma                      445

  Poinciana                       267

  Polycarpæa                       77

  Polycarpon                       76

  Polygala                         61

  Polygonum                        90

  Polypogon                       894

  Polysphæria                     489

  Popowia                           6

  Portulaca                        87

  Potamogeton                     735

  Potentilla                      263

  Pouzolzia                       359

  Premna                          697

  Priva                           694

  Prosopis                        282

  Protea                          143

  Pseudarthria                    318

  Pseudocedrela                   394

  Pseudospondias                  403

  Psidium                         183

  Psilotrichum                    110

  Psophocarpus                    335

  Psoralea                        298

  Psorospermum                    195

  Psychotria                      502

  Pterocarpus                     343

  Pulicaria                       543

  Punica                          132

  Pupalia                         109

  Pycnostachys                    712

  Pycreus                         825

  Randia                          478

  Ranunculus                       12

  Raphanus                         53

  Raphia                          815

  Raphionacme                     441

  Rauwolfia                       433

  Reseda                           58

  Rhamphicarpa                    653

  Rhizophora                      192

  Rhus                            401

  Rhynchosia                      340

  Rhynchospora                    836

  Rhytachne                       852

  Ricinus                         255

  Rinorea                          56

  Rogeria                         663

  Romulea                         793

  Rotala                          127

  Rothia                          290

  Rottbœllia                      849

  Rourea                         405a

  Rubia                           510

  Rubus                           261

  Ruellia                         671

  Rumex                            91

  Ruta                            376

  Rutidea                         500

  Rytiginia                       493

  Saccharum                       854

  Sacciolepis                     881

  Salacia                         365

  Salix                           349

  Salsola                         101

  Salvadora                       367

  Salvia                          717

  Samolus                         594

  Sanseviera                      757

  Sarcocephalus                   466

  Sarcostemma                     455

  Satanocrater                    674

  Sauromatum                      740

  Sauvagesia                      180

  Schizachyrium                   862

  Schizoglossum                   449

  Schmidelia                      397

  Schmidtia                       918

  Schœnefeldia                    904

  Schouwia                         48

  Schweinfurthia                  634

  Schwenkia                       617

  Scilla                          772

  Scirpus                         832

  Scleria                         837

  Sclerocarpus                    551

  Sclerocarya                     404

  Scolymus                        575

  Scoparia                        648

  Scrophularia                    635

  Scutellaria                     719

  Secamone                        444

  Securidaca                       62

  Seddera                         626

  Seetzenia                       120

  Sehima                          843

  Semonvillea                      83

  Sempervivum                      67

  Senebiera                        50

  Senecio                         566

  Senra                           223

  Sesamum                         664

  Sesbania                        306

  Setaria                         882

  Sida                            216

  Siegesbeckia                    548

  Silene                           72

  Sium                            412

  Sisymbrium                       45

  Smilax                          755

  Smithia                         313

  Solanum                         608

  Solenostemma                    447

  Sonchus                         580

  Sopubia                         655

  Sorghum                         855

  Sparganophorus                  512

  Spathodea                       660

  Spergula                         75

  Spermacoce                      507

  Sphæranthus                     533

  Sphærocoma                       78

  Sphenoclea                      584

  Sphenostylis                    337

  Spilanthes                      557

  Sporobolus                      899

  Stachytarpheta                  693

  Statice                         595

  Stemodia                        639

  Stephania                        21

  Sterculia                       210

  Stereospermum                   661

  Stipularia                      476

  Striga                          652

  Strychnos                       426

  Stylochiton                     741

  Stylosanthes                    314

  Suæda                           102

  Sutera                          637

  Swarzia                         347

  Swertia                         592

  Synadenium                      228

  Syzygium                        182

  Tacazzea                        440

  Tacca                           778

  Talinum                          88

  Tamarindus                      275

  Tamarix                         155

  Tarenna                         477

  Taverniera                      309

  Teclea                          377

  Temnocalyx                      495

  Tephrosia                       303

  Teramnus                        328

  Terminalia                      188

  Tetracera                       144

  Teucrium                        724

  Thalassia                       751

  Thalia                          798

  Thelepogon                      842

  Themeda                         869

  Thesium                         371

  Thespesia                       226

  Thunbergia                      666

  Tillæa                           63

  Tinnea                          723

  Tinospora                        16

  Toddalia                       377a

  Torenia                         645

  Trachyphrynium                  800

  Tragia                          257

  Tragus                          896

  Trapa                           135

  Treculia                        354

  Trema                           259

  Trianthema                       86

  Tribulus                        117

  Tricalysia                      485

  Trichilia                       392

  Trichodesma                     603

  Tricholæna                      883

  Trichoneura                     914

  Trichopteryx                    888

  Tridactyle                      806

  Trifolium                       296

  Trigonella                      294

  Triplotaxis                     516

  Tripogon                        916

  Tripteris                       567

  Triraphis                       915

  Tristachya                      889

  Tristemma                       187

  Tristicha                        70

  Tritonia                        791

  Triumfetta                      200

  Trochomeria                     158

  Turræa                          388

  Typha                           738

  Umbilicus                        66

  Uraria                          319

  Urena                           220

  Urera                           356

  Urginea                         771

  Urochloa                        876

  Utricularia                     659

  Uvaria                            3

  Vahlia                           68

  Vallisneria                     748

  Vangueria                       491

  Verbascum                       632

  Verbena                         695

  Verbesina                       556

  Vernonia                        515

  Veronica                        649

  Vetiveria                       856

  Vicia                           322

  Vicoa                           542

  Vigna                           333

  Viola                            54

  Vitex                           698

  Voacanga                        436

  Voandzeia                       334

  Vossia                          844

  Wahlenbergia                    583

  Waltheria                       207

  Wedelia                         554

  Wisneria                        732

  Wissadula                       217

  Withania                        612

  Wolffia                         754

  Woodfordia                      128

  Wormskioldia                     29

  Xanthium                        547

  _Ximenesia_                   _556_

  Ximenia                         368

  Xylopia                           7

  Zea                             840

  Zehneria                        167

  Zilla                            52

  Zizyphus                        372

  Zornia                          316

  Zygophyllum                     118


                         INDEX TO FAMILY NAMES.


                       PAGE

  Acanthaceæ            337

  Alismataceæ           365

  Amarantaceæ            81

  Amaryllidaceæ         391

  Ampelidaceæ           223

  Anacardiaceæ          233

  Anonaceæ               49

  Apocynaceæ            244

  Aponogetonaceæ        366

  Aristolochiaceæ        54

  Araceæ                369

  Asclepiadaceæ         248

  Balsaminaceæ           89

  Basellaceæ             86

  Bignoniaceæ           334

  Bixaceæ                96

  Bombacaceæ            124

  Boraginaceæ           302

  Burseraceæ            229

  Butomaceæ             366

  Cactaceæ              106

  Caesalpiniaceæ        160

  Campanulaceæ          299

  Cannabinaceæ          217

  Capparidaceæ           56

  Caricaceæ             105

  Caryophyllaceæ         70

  Celastraceæ           218

  Ceratophyllaceæ        52

  Chailletiaceæ         160

  Chenopodiaceæ          79

  Cochlospermaceæ        96

  Combretaceæ           109

  Commelinaceæ          387

  Compositæ             274

  Connaraceæ            236

  Convolvulaceæ         313

  Crassulaceæ            68

  Cruciferæ              63

  Cucurbitaceæ           99

  Cycadaceæ              48

  Cyperaceæ             404

  Dilleniaceæ            96

  Dioscoreaceæ          385

  Dipterocarpaceæ       107

  Droseraceæ             69

  Ebenaceæ              238

  Elatinaceæ             70

  Ericaceæ              238

  Eriocaulaceæ          403

  Euphorbiaceæ          134

  Ficoidaceæ             74

  Flacourtiaceæ          97

  Frankeniaceæ           98

  Fumariaceæ             56

  Gentianaceæ           300

  Geraniaceæ             88

  Gnetaceæ               48

  Gramineæ              430

  Guttiferæ             117

  Halorrhagaceæ          92

  Hippocrateaceæ        218

  Hydnoraceæ             55

  Hydrocharitaceæ       371

  Hydrophyllaceæ        302

  Hypericaceæ           116

  Illecebraceæ           78

  Iridaceæ              393

  Labiatæ               355

  Lemnaceæ              373

  Lentibulariaceæ       333

  Liliaceæ              373

  Linaceæ                86

  Lobeliaceæ            298

  Loganiaceæ            241

  Loranthaceæ           220

  Lythraceæ              89

  Malvaceæ              125

  Marantaceæ            395

  Melastomataceæ        108

  Meliaceæ              230

  Menispermaceæ          53

  Mimosaceæ             166

  Molluginaceæ           72

  Moraceæ               209

  Moringaceæ             63

  Musaceæ               396

  Myrsinaceæ            240

  Myrtaceæ              107

  Naiadaceæ             367

  Nyctaginaceæ           94

  Nymphaeaceæ            52

  Ochnaceæ              106

  Olacaceæ              220

  Oleaceæ               242

  Onagraceæ              91

  Opiliaceæ             220

  Orchidaceæ            396

  Orobanchaceæ          333

  Oxalidaceæ             88

  Palmæ                 401

  Pandanaceæ            403

  Papaveraceæ            56

  Papilionaceæ          175

  Passifloraceæ          98

  Pedaliaceæ            336

  Phytolaccaceæ          78

  Piperaceæ              55

  Pittosporaceæ          96

  Plantaginaceæ         301

  Plumbaginaceæ         301

  Podostemonaceæ         70

  Polygalaceæ            67

  Polygonaceæ            76

  Pontederiaceæ         384

  Portulacaceæ           75

  Potamogetonaceæ       367

  Primulaceæ            301

  Proteaceæ              95

  Punicaceæ              91

  Ranunculaceæ           51

  Resedaceæ              66

  Rhamnaceæ             222

  Rhizophoraceæ         116

  Rosaceæ               159

  Rubiaceæ              257

  Rutaceæ               226

  Salicaceæ             209

  Salvadoraceæ          219

  Samydaceæ              97

  Santalaceæ            222

  Sapindaceæ            232

  Sapotaceæ             239

  Saxifragaceæ           69

  Scrophulariaceæ       324

  Simarubaceæ           227

  Solanaceæ             308

  Sterculiaceæ          122

  Taccaceæ              385

  Tamaricaceæ            98

  Thymelæaceæ            92

  Tiliaceæ              117

  Turneraceæ             56

  Typhaceæ              368

  Ulmaceæ               158

  Umbelliferæ           237

  Urticaceæ             216

  Verbenaceæ            349

  Violaceæ               66

  Vitaceæ               223

  Zingiberaceæ          393

  Zygophyllaceæ          86




FOOTNOTES:


[Footnote 1: Notes were also drawn at a later date from “The Useful
Plants of Nigeria,” J. H. Holland. Kew Bulletin, Additional Series.]

[Footnote 2: Macmillan & Co., St. Martin’s St., London, W.C.2 (1926),
20s. net.]

[Footnote 3: The names used for these three groups are applied here for
the convenience of the student. The “Parietales” in this sense are not
the _Parietales_ of either Bentham & Hooker or of Engler.]

[Footnote 4: The flowers of this family (which consist of 5 usually free
sepals, a 5-lobed corolla, 5 stamens and a pistil of 2 carpels) are
peculiar (i) by the _coronal_ lobes, either free or connate, simple or
double at or inside the mouth of the tube of the corolla; (ii) by the
stamens which, although exceptionally free at the base, are usually
connate by the filaments; these, with the anthers and their appendages
forming the _staminal column_, but the anthers being free or united to
the dilated part of the style; the anthers are 2, dehiscing by terminal
or lateral slits and are continued on the margins or below the pollen
cells by wing-like processes (_anther-wings_); the connectives of the
anthers are often produced into membranous (rarely fleshy or inflated)
terminal, sometimes connate appendages, or apiculate, or unappendaged;
(iii) by the pollen which is either granular or more commonly united
into 1 or 2 clavate, waxy masses or _pollinia_; (iv) by the pistil
which, although consisting of 2 carpels, is united above into a dilated
pentagonal disk; (v) by the fruit consisting of 2 follicles or by
abortion one only, the seeds being usually numerous, imbricate, somewhat
like fish scales, generally crowned with a tuft of long silky hairs.]

[Footnote 5: Herbs; stems cylindrical or trigonous, solid. Leaves grass-
like, tough, but sheaths (except in _Eriospora Schweinfurthiana_) not
slit down one side. Infl. umbellate, capitate or panicled, made up of
spikes bearing spikelets composed of an axis (_rhachilla_) and of empty
or flower-bearing bracts (_glumes_). Fl. minute, 1 or 2-sexual, in axils
of glumes. Per. 0, or consisting of 2-6 hypogynous scales or bristles;
sta. 1-3, anthers basifixed; style 2-3 branched, or subentire, base
often thickened; fruit a compressed or 3-gonous nut.]

[Footnote 6: Differs from _Cyperus_ by never being leafless, by
disarticulation of (always winged) rhachilla in one piece above the two
lowest empty glumes, and by the spikelets which, in Cyperus never less
than 5 fld., may here be as little as 1 fld. (although at times up to 20
fld.).]




Transcriber's note:


  Several of the Keys to the families (starting pg. 16) have had their
  key steps marked with letters, in the style of the Key to the genera
  of Grasses (pg. 430).

  pg 1 Changed: male organs of a flowers to: flower

  pg 5 Changed: =Gnetaceæ= and =Cyacadaceæ= to: =Cycadaceæ=

  pg 5 Changed: glass-like, transparent or trunslucent to: translucent

  pg 10 Changed: bundles by junction of filamens to: filaments

  pg 11 Changed: generally separate at muturity to: maturity

  pg 12 From: stamen, the ovone male organ of the flower.
  removed: ovone

  pg 35 Changed: Ovules 1-2 in each cell; corolla lobes inbricate to:
  imbricate

  pg 45 Changed: march or aquatic herbs to: marsh

  pg 46 Changed: =Pontederiacæ= (part) to: =Pontederiaceæ=

  pg 47 Changed: =Zinziberaceæ= to: =Zingiberaceæ=

  pg 54 Changed: maroon-coloured, unilateral, legulate to: ligulate

  pg 56 Changed: Borber Desert to: Berber

  pg 63 Changed: BUN—Borun to: Burun

  pg 63 Changed: hairs shellate. Pods subsessile to: stellate

  pg 65 Changed: MAHAD, NAMNAM (Egyt) to: Egypt

  pg 71 Changed: =P. spicata= _Arnolt._ to: _Arnott._

  pg 73 (Under =Glinus lotoides=) Changed: Bahr El Ghazar Prov. to:
  Ghazal

  pg 84 Changed: =Pupalla lappacea= _Juss._ to: =Pupalia=

  pg 85 Changed: terminal, straw-colouerd to: straw-coloured

  pg 87 Changed: =Seetzenia africana= _Br._ to: _R. Br._

  pg 93 Changed: Bahr El Ghazal Pdov. (Niamniam-land to: Prov.

  pg 94 (Under =B. [Boerhaavia] repens var. diffusa=) Changed: Fung.
  Prov. (Fazowhli) to: Fazoghli

  pg 102 Changed: KHIAR—Arabfl to: Arab.

  pg 105 Changed: =Cucurbita maxima= _Dushesne._ to: _Duchesne._

  pg 108 Changed: Jebel (Madi); Bahr El Grazal to: Ghazal

  pg 111 Changed: broadly lanceolate or elliptic accuminate to:
  acuminate

  pg 129 Changed: =Kosteletzkya adoenis= _Hochst._ to: =adoensis=

  pg 133 Changed: =Cienfugosia digitata= _Cav._ to: =Cienfuegosia=

  pg 133 Changed: =G. obtusiolium= Roxb. to: =obtusifolium=

  pg 149 Changed: Male fl. calx 5-lobed valvate to: calyx

  pg 153 (Under =A. [Acalypha] villicaulis=) Changed: styles 3,
  lacinate to: laciniate

  pg 155 =A. cordata= _Benth._ formatted as a synonim instead: _A.
  cordata_ Benth.

  pg 160 At the end of: =Parkinsonia aculeata= _Linn._ SESABAN (wrongly
  named)— added: Arab.

  pg 166 Changed: =P. filicoida= _Welw._ to: =filicoidea=

  pg 167 Changed: =Piptadenia africana= _Hook._ to: _Hook. f._

  pg 170 Changed: Flowers globose, yellow, about 1 lin. diam. to: 1 in.
  diam.

  pg 173 Changed: =A. hecataphylla= _Steud._ to: =hecatophylla=

  pg 178 Changed: Pod silky, unde ½ in. to: under

  pg 179 "White Nile Prov. (J. Arashkol)." moved from right under =C.
  goreensis= to two lines above, under =C. podocarpa=

  pg 180 Changed: =Argyroiobium abyssinicum= _Jaub._ & _Spach._ to:
  =Argyrolobium=

  pg 188 Changed: =I. [Indigofera] tripoides= Baker. to: =tritoides=

  pg 189 Changed: =Biserula Pelecinus L.= _Hochst._ to: =Biserula
  Pelecinus= _L._

  pg 198 Changed: Dongolo Prov. (Cultivated). to: Dongola

  pg 202 Changed: Leaflets 3, cenral roundish to: central

  pg 212 Changed: grabrous. Receptacle not known to: glabrous

  pg 216 Changed: 3-8 in. long, coriceous to: coriaceous

  pg 221 Changed: young parts rusty-tomotose to: rusty-tomentose

  pg 222 Changed: usually one straight and one ecurved to: recurved

  pg 230 Changed: =Turræa Vogellii= _Hook. f._ to: =Vogelii=

  pg 255 Changed: Rd Sea, Kassala & Kordofan to: Red

  pg 267 Changed: Fozoghli and Abu Sugra to: Fazoghli

  pg 274 Changed: Leaves vertillate, ovate, cordate to: verticillate

  pg 281 Changed: Bahr El Jebel (Sudd 8° 40 in.) to: (Sudd 8° 40″)

  pg 282 Changed: Kordofan Prof. (J. Um Darrag) to: Prov.

  pg 291 Changed: few minute or more usally wanting to: usually

  pg 299 Changed: =L. [Lobelia] trievarchi= _R. Good._ to: =trierarchi=

  pg 300 Changed: =GENTIAMACEÆ= to: =GENTIANACEÆ=

  pg 319 Changed: petioles and penduncles winged to: peduncles

  pg 353 (Under =C. [Clerodendron] cordifolium=) switched the positions
  of the line starting with "white, tube ⅔ in. long" and the line
  starting with "6,000 ft.); Bahr El Ghazal Prov."

  pg 360 Changed: =Lavandula pubescens= _Dene._ to: _Decne._

  pg 361 Changed: =Salvia nudicalis= _Vahl._ to: =nudicaulis=

  pg 374 (Under =A. [Asparagus] africanus=) Changed: Bash El Jebel to:
  Bahr

  pg 376 Changed: =Asphodelus fistulosus= _Linn._ =var. tenufolius=
  _Baker._ to: =tenuifolius=

  pg 402 Changed: somtimes spiny tendril to: sometimes

  pg 406 Changed: North Khordofan Prov. to: Kordofan

  pg 410 Changed: Spikelets many in dense heads, dusky or brown, 10-30
  fid. to: 10-30 fld.

  pg 437 Changed: 903 =Leplochloa= to: =Leptochloa=

  pg 460 Changed: =E. pyrmidalis= _Hitchcock_ and_ Chase._ to:
  =pyramidalis=

  pg 463 Changed: 81 =Sacciolepis ciliocincta= to: 881

  pg 464 (Under =S. [Sacciolepis] micrococca=) Changed: Spikelets
  crowded, swollen, ¼-in. to: 1/24 in. (Cf. R. Massey _Sudan grasses_,
  1926)

  pg 466 Changed: loose panicle up to 6 in. land to: 6 in. long

  pg 468 (Under =P. [Pennisetum] ovale=) Changed: Uper White Nile Prov.
  to: Upper

  pg 481 (Under =Eleusine indica=) Changed: Spikelets 1/8-1/16 in. long
  to: 1/8-1/6

  pg 489 Changed: Rikan to: Rihan

  pg 493 Changed: Akhalkuala to: Aknalkuala

  pg 497 Changed: Antephora to: Anthephora

  pg 497 Changed: Cienfugosia to: Cienfuegosia

  pg 498 Changed: Enarthocarpus to: Enarthrocarpus

  pg 498 Changed: Erpthrophlæum to: Erythrophlæum

  pg 498 Changed: Farsettia to: Farsetia

  pg 499 Changed: Legenaria to: Lagenaria

  pg 500 Changed: Pantatropis to: Pentatropis

  pg 502 Changed: Halorraghaceæ to: Halorrhagaceæ

  pg 502 Changed: Scrophularaceæ to: Scrophulariaceæ

  Minor changes in punctuation have been done silently.

  Other spelling inconsistencies have been left unchanged.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FLORA OF THE SUDAN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


